
A REIGN OF BLOOD

Spain Bent on Wiping Out the Whole Cuban Population.

SLAUGHTER GOES ON DAILY

Officers Who Kill the Most Peasants Promoted and Decorated.

“HOT EVEN A CAT” TO BE LEFT.

Children of Spanish Famines of High Standing Ash for Cuban Ears for Playthings.

TROOPS TAUGHT NATIVES ARE SAVAGES.

A Wave of Extermination Rolling:

Over the Fairest Isle of the West Indies.

(Special Correspondence of The World.) Near Banes, Pinar del Rio, Cuba, June 8, 1896.

Two pairs of things happened here to-day:

A Cuban widow and children mourned for their hard-working; husband and father, murdered yesterday by the Spaniards;

A Cuban aged couple wept over their son, a peaceful laborer, butchered yesterday by Spaniards, and

A Spanish soldier, wounded yesterday, lay on a stretcher under surgeon’s care, protected by Cubans;

A Spanish prisoner of war, captured yesterday, walked free, liberated by Cubans.

The red and yellow standard of Castile and the red, white and blue of Cuba Libre float over this same marvellous contrast In every part of the island.

And what a contrast it is! On one hand is ancient Spain, a nation of recognized civilization, whose representative was lately honored by being made one of the very few personages that have ever been the public guests of the United States of America. This Christian power is now, with ample proofs of the fact, permitting its officers to allow and actually participate in a ruthless butchery of innocent, unarmed human beings. Spain is daily violating every fundamental principle of humanity, of religion and of civilization.

Not only are daily outrages allowed; they are rewarded. Two of the Spanish chiefs in the field most frequently proven to have countenanced the slaying of innocent people have been recently promoted "for brilliant victories In the field." In fact, these men have done less actual shooting at rebels than any of the others. They have made more marches; that is all. Every "march" results in an official report of the number of "rebels" killed, and the greatest number of dead bodies reported gains promotion and decorations. There are many Spanish officers, doubtless, to whom the slaughter of innocents is abhorrent, but these men every day see others promoted for lists of dead presented at the close of every march, and they know, and it is a matter of common talk in official circles, that 95 per cent, of the dead so reported had no arms, were not rebels; in fact, were but "pacficos." Naturally with such an easy road to rank and honors there are many who take it.

An Oft-Told Tale.

It is difficult to write of Spanish doings in Cuba without becoming tiresome. Tho murder of one here and another there goes' along—the same thing every day. There are few wholesale slaughters like that at Guatao. It is simply a monotonous dripping of innocent blood that surely should arouse the manly wrath of every American citizen.

From every indication, from the proven cases, from the authentically reported cases, from The World's map of the legally proven outrages in a district not noted for such perpetrations, it becomes evident that a slaughter of native, peaceable Cubans is going on in Cuba of which not a tenth is yet known and which has already amounted to a partial depopulation of the island. If this is not checked at once it will develop rapidly to the consummation of what can proved to be a definite Spanish policy of extermination.

Look at the facts. The Spanish newspapers describe this people as useless savages; The Spanish Captain-General asserts that the portion in arms are "barbarians," incendiaries, robbers and bandits, and the natural inference is [  ] entire natiye population is of the same exterminable stripe, for to a man they are at least silent sympathizers with their fighting brothers. The Spanish business men look with longing [  ] the riches of Cubans. The Spanish [  ] freely speak the thought, and one [  ] hear them and their betters do so [  ] gathering place for Spaniards. [] expression as to what will be [  ] Cuba after the war is "ni un gato" "not even a cat." This is "talk," [  ] but it is indicative of peninsular thought.

Playthings.

The very children, and those of [  ] families at that, ask for Cuban [  ] as playthings, With such a feel-[  ] the Spanish public as thus [  ] it is no wonder that the soldiers [  ] send here have but the one thought of extermination. The soldiers interviewed have all stated [  ] this was their idea of a [  ] manner of dealing with the [  ] and that it was here fostered [  ] officers. These soldiers were not [  ] to admit too much, for their [  ] had also told them how very [  ] the Cubans treated Spanish [  ]. One’s idea was the "deguello,” ancient bugle-call for ”no quarter,” [  ] had been told that all the Spaniards in Cuba were in the cities. All had been told that in the country there were but two parties, Spaniards and rebels, and that the “rebels" were to be exterminated. All understood in Spain that the Cubans were black savages “who never went into towns.”

The Spanish Church tolerates the policy. When confronted with proofs of outrages, the Bishop of Havana told The World correspondent there at the time that he did not think Spanish soldiers could do the things mentioned, and absolutely refused to investigate one.

The Spanish Government stands by this, its policy, through thick and thin. It first removed a humane chief and sent here Gen. Weyler. It was felt at the time that this was prophetic of a reign of blood. It was. This Government has also rewarded the workers of atrocities by honors as mentioned.

A Wave of Extermination.

As stated, a glance over the known events of the war warrants the statement that a veritable wave of extermination is beginning to sweep over Cuba. The Government would never dare to inaugurate this plan of campaign without some covering-up scheme. This is simply to report the murdered pacficos as insurgents killed in battle. The scheme has worked well up to the present, and the slaughter has increased daily. This policy is for Spain her only hope, for as long as Cuban mothers bear children to teach them the story of their fathers’ wrongs, so long will there be war in Spanish Cuba.

Yesterday two more farmers were murdered here. The story is the usual one. The men were simply taken from their houses and murdered In cold blood. Their names were Francisco Milian and Francisco Garcia, both pacficos, both unarmed, both unconnected even remotely with the war and both the sole supports of helpless people.

The simply worded statement of Milan's relatives gives the story. As usual, the signatures cannot be printed, in view of Spanish vengeance.

A Plain Story of Murder.

NBAR BANES. Province del Rio, Cuba, June 8, 1895.

We by our solemn oaths and by our crosses do affirm,

First, that we, peaceable people and not connected with the war, know that yesterday at 10 o’clock in the morning our relative, Francisco Milian, was killed by the column of San Quintn and without any cause;

That our relative was in no way mixed up in the war nor had any dealings with the insurgents;

That Francisco was in his house at 8 o’clock yesterday dressing himself to go for medicine for his daughter. A "guerilla” told him to come, as the colonel wanted to speak to him.

The colonel took him to "El Frances” and killed him with three shots and two ”machetasses” (machete strokes);

That at the same time was killed by four bullets Francisco Garcia. He was a pacifico also, and was killed without cause. His father and mother had but him to support them;

That we bitterly protest against the doings of the troops. They have killed many good people hero and we beseech the United States to stop the killing.

(Signed by seven Cubans in the presence of Sylvester Scovel, an American, and a Cuban, as witnesses.)

Approaching Milian’s home I passed groups of sad-faced women. They were going to comfort the destitute wife and children of the murdered man. Arriving at tho place, I found stern-faced men who knew Milian and knew of his fate, not one of them but would now join the war if he had but the rifle and cartridges. A woman lay on the porch so violently taken with convulsions that men had to use force to hold her down. She was the sister of the murdered man. The news of his death by Spanish ball and sword was responsible for her condition.

and; sword was responsible for her condition.

Milian was the head of his branch of the family. The cut shows some of them the family. Some of them could read and had heard of Macco's proclamation which mentions the hope of American intervention. The last clause of their document is pathetic—“and we beseech the United States to stop the killing.”

Time would not allow a visit to the home of the other victim, but three of the signers had seen and buried his dead body close to the place where lies the little boy, Pimienta, killed by the same battalion of San Quintn a few days ago, as printed in The World. These men were killed after the skirmish with the Cuban leader Acosta, which took place fully two miles away from their homes, and with which they were not and could not possibly have been connected. The commander of the troops had started out to surprise the rebel camp at El Frances. He was outwitted, had five men killed, one badly wounded, several more hurt and one taken prisoner. He then took the two nearest pacificos to El Frances and killed them by shot after shot, helped along by occasional blows of the sword.

 predict that the Havana papers to-day state that “the valiant battalion of San Quintn effectually surprised the camp of the rebels, who fled, carrying many dead with them, but leaving five bodies behind them.”

The troops then burned some property of a citizen of the United States, and killed two "pacficos” and took away eighteen others.

Our officers told us that the rebels killed every Spaniard they took prisoner. (Signed).	PEDRO	G ALVAREZ.

Witness, SYLVESTER SCOVEL.

Tho place where he was captured was near El Frances, and he heard the shots that killed the two men. Later he saw the bodies. He testifies as to the habits of this battalion of San Quintn,which now appears to be no worse than eight out of ten of the other Spanish marching columns.

The Red Cross.

At the same time that the families of the butchered Cubans were weeping I saw the wounded Spanish soldier Mariano Gomez y Mesto. Ho was lying comfortably In a shaded stretcher under the skilled care of a fine surgeon and nursed by members of the Caballeros Hospitalarios, or Spanish Red Cross Society, of the near-by town of Calmito. They had been sent for by the Cubans. It was the first time I had seen the flag on a Cuban field.

It was fired upon by the Spaniards at San Pedro, and here, right under the lee of a Spanish heliograph station, was likely to receive the same treatment, as the insurgents could be seen on the place. The members were principally Spaniards. They were not in the least afraid of Cuban maltreatment, and lamented the fact that they could not fully carry out the beneficent scheme of the order and carry help to Cubans wounded. Naturally, this Is impossible under Spain and Weyler, although under their charter they are granted the right to alleviate suffering wherever found.

The Spanish soldier was wounded badly, with machete cuts on his head and two balls through his body. Had he been Cuban the impossibility of moving him slowly would have caused his death before now. As it is, he will get well, and he owes it all to the Cubans, for the Red Cross men otherwise would have known nothing of the affair.

The humane policy pursued in this zone, of which several examples have recently been seen, Is exactly the same as is being shown by Cubans to Spaniards all over the island.

It is in pursuance of the policy of the Cuban Government as stated by Gen. Gomez in his message to The World: "No matter how many Cubans the Spaniards may murder or mutilate, our policy will always be one of the humanity that should be demanded from Spain by every nation that dares to call itself civilized."

Every unpunished and rewarded Spanish atrocity points to a Spanish policy of ruthless extermination of a civilized people.

Every prisoner liberated, every wounded man cured, adds additional emphasis to the Cuban policy of humanity and forbearance under the barbarous treatment of really savage Spain.

History furnishes no parallel of a civilized nation of modern times daily permitting and encouraging such a systematic killing of unarmed people as is going on here this very day.

SYLVESTER SCOVEL.