GEN. GOMEZ'S MESSAGE TO THE WORLD.
First Authentic Statement of the Plans, Aims, and Hopes and Strategic Position of Cuban Insurgents' Commander in Chief.
 40,000 CUBANS AGAINST 140,000 SPANISH.
 
 Total Number of Arms Received from Outside Is Less than 500, the Rest Being Captured from Troops, Towns or Plantations.
 
 GEN. WEYLER AN HONORABLE SOLDIER, BUT CRUEL.
 
 Though Confident of Ultimate Triumph the Cubans Are Willing to Pay $100,000,000 Perhaps More, for Freedom.
 
 (Copyright, 1896, by the Press Publishing Company New York World.)
 (Special Correspondence of The World.)
 Headquarters Gen. Gomez, near San Antonio de los Banos, HAVANA PROVINCE, Jan. 26.
 Gen. Gomez's wound, received at this place Jan. 14, has not proved serious. In spite of his hurt and of his seventy-two years of age and thirteen years of war, (ten of them continuous exposure in the last Cuban rebellion), his rugged constitution enables him to manage his fiery horses and endure the exceptional fatigue of long marches like a youngster.
    He was struck by a Mauser bullet, which passed through his right leg from the front. Although causing no fracture of the bone, the wound is painful and aggravated by the General's refusal to quit the saddle. He has personally directed his forces in their daily marches and almost daily skirmishes.
    Pleased to Give His Views.
    Despite his wound and the demands upon his time, Gen Gomez expresses himself as being pleased to give his views upon the present state of affairs in Cuba to the people of the United States through such a powerful medium as The World. 
    In answer to the question, "How will the substitution of Gen. Weyler for Gen. Campos affect the Cuban chances?" Gen. Gomez said:
    "The change will benefit the Cuban cause. We have lost a most powerful enemy in Martinez Campos. His strong character and personal influence have held to Spain many of the most influential and richest Cuban that otherwise would have followed their natural inclinations to assist in freeing their country. He is without doubt the first general in Spain. The troops of the line idolized him, and with his departure they are left without a leader in whom they have confidence. I regard these good soldiers as being in the same state in which the grand army of France round, or rather lost, itself upon the departure of Napoleon the First."
    Fen. Gomez discredits the widely circulated reports ascribing to Gen. Weyler many acts of licentiousness while in command of a column in the last war.
    Thinks Weyler Honorable but Cruel
    "I regard Gen. Weyler as an honorable but cruel soldier," he declared. "In his military ability, however, I do not think he can be for a moment compared with Gen. Campos. In the last war the movements of his command were not brilliant, and he was noted only for his unrelenting cruelty towards defenseless non-combatants, which actions he now claims were in obedience to superior authority. 
    "Gen. Weyler comes here in answer to the demands of the Spaniards in Cuba, organized and known as the Conservative party. They are the Government officials and merchants who have grown fat by authorized peculation and the high prices maintained by unjust import laws. He has not the high character of Gen. Campos, who preferred to be dismissed rather than carry out a policy he abhored.
    "This policy was outlined and demanded of the Government by the Conservatives, and now comes Weyler, asked for by them, presumably to obey orders as he did in the last war. He says he doesn't contemplate the establishment of a reign of terror in the cities of Cuba. If he means this and acts accordingly he will quickly be superseded by another--by Polavieja, for instance, for the Conservative party in power will not hesitate to bring to Cuba a man of a reputation so unsavory that even the Spanish public cannot stomach it.
    Atrocities May Be Delayed.
    "Atrocities in the towns will likely begin until it is discovered that the change of generals has produced no more and perhaps fewer victories in the field.
    "I have begun to divide Western Cuba into districts, in each of which is placed a small force. Its commander is supposed to canvass his district thoroughly, and to enlist as many men as possible. These are given their first military training in the district force, and then are sent to the main 'columns of operations.'
    "In the establishment of these military districts and the organization of the civil "prefecturas" on every two square miles of Western Cuba, I apprehend no difficulty, for the 'plain people' here have been even much more friendly and of greater assistance than I had expected them to be.
    Praises Spanish Regulars.
    "The Spanish regular soldier is brave to a fault, and implicitly obedient. He is patient, does not eat much, and carries weight like a mule--in short, I consider the Spanish regular troops, armed with the Mauser rifles, the best in the world to-day."
    Being asked his opinion of the Spanish officers, Gen. Gomez paused a moment, then spoke slowly:
    "There are brave and intelligent officers in the field, some very close to us at this moment, but the others, and they are the major part, are poor--yes, bad, from either a mental, moral or military standpoint.
    "It is usually poor policy to belittle an antagonist, but you wish the truth, and here it is. The Spanish army in Cuba, [] the departure of Gen. Campos, has been like a man [] body and fine head, but having a crooked neck. Now that the doctors of the Government have sent it a head to match the neck, we will see whether the vigor of the man will increase or diminish.
    "The modern rifle of small calibre is magnificent. Its rapidity of fire, its power and its extreme range give its possessor a tremendous advantage over opponents not so armed. First, because so many men can be hit, and second, and more important, because of those struck by its projectiles a wonderfully small proportion die. My Surgeon-General claims that with modern facilities he could save the life of almost any man who did not die within six hours after being struck. 
    "The result is a great number of wounded, who must be taken care of. A dead man can be buried, but a wounded one must be carried. If my wounded had not plenty of patriotic fellow Cubans to take them off my hands it would be almost impossible for me to make the rapid movements necessary to conduct a successful defensive campaign in an open country against an enemy superior in numbers and vastly superior in armament.
    "The Spanish artillery, both mountain guns and field pieces, has had no effect in this war, except to impede the Spanish movements. Outside of a slight moral effect upon the recruits caused by the heavy discharges, they have accomplished nothing more than to kill one man and wound another--and a horse--I was nearly forgetting the horse--he received a piece of a shell in his nose.
    "The reported embarkation in Spain of large cavalry forces for Cuba does not concern me. If they bring their own horses here," he observed, "it will be a heavy expense to Spain, and they will not be able to feed them grain here. Unused to grazing, to the climate and to peculiar forage of Cuba, they will die.
    "As for securing cavalry mounts here, I think"--and Gomez's eyes twinkled--"that my boys have already cleaned up about all the good horses in Cuba.
    "The people of the United States must have a very wrong idea of the amount of war material we have actually received from there.
    "It is not right to beg for what ought to have been long ago accorded to us as our right. If the United States Government, seeing the righteousnes of our cause, had given us this acknowledgment at first it would have been a great credit to her among the nations of the world, for we were then weak. Now that we are strong, now that we control the island from east to west, such an action becomes less significant. I hope it may come soon, however, for then my poor boys who are taken prisoners may not be killed with impunity. However, I wish to say plainly that we have fought  this war for freedom so far successfully without help. We can win it without help if need be, and if so it will be all the more to ur credit.
    Loath to Burn American Property.
    "The Government of the Republic of Cuba has been loath to order me to destroy the cane of American estates. In fact, it did not like to have to destroy any property, but it was deemed necessary to strike a blow at the finances of Spain. This has been successful , and our enemy will not now receive the $18,000,000 with which to carry on her war against us that she would have received as import duties upon articles brought into Cuba in exchange for the sugar crop had we allowed the same to be made. Only enough cane has been burned to stop the operation of the mills.
    [] [] have been treated alike--American, German, Spanish--even those owned by patriotic Gubans have been prevented from making sugar this year. The buildings and machinery have in no case been touched. The sugar industry has been the only one temporarily stopped, not only because it yields the most revenue to Spain, but for the even more important consideration that those engaged in it are better able to stand the loss of a year's profits than are those engaged in the other principal industry--tobacco. This has not been touched, nor has any other been interfered with except the railroad and telegraph companies. These are being disabled on the axiomatic principle of war--the destruction of the enemy's means of transportation and communication.
    "It is true that some railway stations have been burned, the destruction of which is not necessary to the end in view. This and all other useless destruction has not been premeditated, and, although it has never been much, it has been stopped completely. The English owners of railroads have bitterly protested, advancing the claim that all English capital would be scared away from Cuba. I am free to say that as long as English capital moves Spanish troops it is not entitled to any favors from Cubans, and, further, that we do not want English capital or any other capital to be invested in Cuba as long as the capital pays tribute to a country other than that from which it derives its profits."
    The question was then put: "Are Cubans still willing to purchase their independence?" After some though Gomez answered:
    $100,000,000 for Independence.
    "Of course, in view of the rapidly increasing growth of the revolution this course would not now be so readily approved by the Cubans as at first. Moreover, it is a question for our Government to decide, but I think I am warranted in answering 'Yes' to the question. The Cubans will now offer for their freedom $100,000,000, or perhaps more, to be paid within one year from this time.
    "I do not think that if Spain could be brought to accept the offer the Cubans would have trouble in raising this sum of money, large though it be, within the time mentioned, for they have the richest island in the world to offer as security. For the last ten years, even with her enterprises strangled by Spain, Cuba has paid an average yearly tribute to that country of $26,000,000 or a total of $260,000,000. With the rapid development of her resources that would inevitably ensue upon the establishment of a just form of government in Cuba, these sums could be much increased, with a less grievous taxation per capita than exists now, or did exist just before the war.
    "But without considering these facts, and taking the sums as above stated, a loan of $100,000,000 could be repaid with interest, at even 8 per cent., in less than six years. To secure the loan I believe the Government of the Republic of Cuba would go so far as to allow the Government of the United States, should the loan be placed there, to administer the finances and retain the revenues of Cuba until such time as the full amount should be repaid. I would rather see the Cubans shoulder the burden of a heavy national debt, and have peace at once, than to shed more Cuban blood, even did I know the war could be won in a week's time.
    No Race War Possible.
    "No government making such a loan would have to fear in the slightest degree the necessity of having to protect its interests in the event of a race war in Cuba, for no such war will be possible. One fact simply stated will be enough to support this statement. The Cubans, white and black, are by nature peaceable and industrious. Nothing but the long-continued, grievous abuses by the Spanish could have aroused them to action. THey would be perfectly contented under a republican form of government.
    Asked why the Cubans have not tried to fight big battles, the General replied:
    "The total number of arms I have received from outside of CUba is less than 500, the number of cartridges less than 200,000. Every one of the rest of the 40,000 arms we now have has been captured from the Spanish troops or taken from the towns or plantations. We have also obtained from the same sources our scanty ammunition, of which we have had to use some almost every day in our rear-guard engagements, which could not be well avoided, seeing that against our 40,000 armed men the Government has 140,000. 
    "The important victories of Bayamo, Pelayo, Mal Trempo, Calimete and Iguara have all been won by the machete--by inexperienced forces, armed only with a short sword, against disciplined and brave troops, armed with the finest of modern rifles and an abundance of ammunition. The machete, then, becomes our sole reliance in the lack of cartridges for our guns. I am satisfied that it is so, and also am not displeased to have a skirmish every other day with one of the following or intercepting Spanish columns, for these constant conflicts will soon make good soldiers out of my recruits.
    "Most of our forces in the West are new. When they become seasoned, which will be soon, the Cuban 'Army of Liberty' will give instead of take battle from our enemy. Naturally, if we had ample ammunition to first sake "the Spanish squares by rifle fire before we charge them, it would be much better for us, but"--and the old veteran's eyes flashed--"I hope within a very short time to upset the theory stated in modern text-books on war that the naked sword is an obsolete weapon!
    "No matter how many legitimate Cuban prisoners of war the Spaniards may hang, shoot or mutilate--no matter how many defenseless Cubans they may kill in the cities, if they carry out the plans of the party in power--my treatment of those Spaniards who may be taken prisoners will be the one called for by humanity, and which should be demanded of the Spanish Government by every power in the world that dares to call itself civilized. I have captured and returned to their commands unharmed over 1,000 prisoners of war. Those captured in the future will be treated in the same manner, no matter what policy the Spanish Government may follow."
    When asked for a comparison between the last war and this, he declared:
    "No comparison is possible. The last war was but a good preparation for this. Then 7,000 Cubans kept up the struggle ten years. Now we have 40,000 men in the field. You may form your own conclusions."
    SYLVESTER SCOVEL.
    [Image of handwritten note by M. GOMEZ: "The interview with Gen. Gomez which appears in this issue was written out by The World correspondent and submitted to the General for his approval. When it had been translated to him he expressed his entire satisfaction with its accuracy, and voluntarily appended to it his indorsement in Spanish, which is reproduced herewith in fac simile. Translated this indorsement reads: "I am satisfied with the clearness that your correspondent manifests, and I authorize the publication in The New York World of the above interview."
    M. GOMEZ, General in Chief.