CUBANS RETURN GOOD FOR EVIL

Spanish Spy Liberated by Insurgents in the Face of Beating and Murder of Their Fellows.

(Copyright, 1898, by the Press Publishing Company,

New York World.)

(Special Correspondence of The World.)

NEAR GUANAJAY, Pinar del Rio, Cuba, May 23.—Outrages continue in this district.

A Spanish column beat two men May 20 and severely injured a boy with carbine strokes.

Another Spanish column killed In cold blood on the 21st, and in his own house, a peaceable laborer wholly unconnected with the insurgents.

To-day (the 23d) the insurgents of the same district, with full knowledge of the maltreatment of their fellows, set at liberty a Spanish prisoner who admitted that he was a spy.

These events have taken place within a few miles of each other. The trial, confession and liberation of the Spanish spy I heard and saw. In proof of the Spanish outrages I submit written evidence, besides having interviewed many other eye-witnesses thereto.

It must be understood that the witnesses with whom I have talked, and especially those who have signed their names or made their marks, have done so at the risk of their lives.

The officers of the columns mentioned will surely hear from Havana in consequence of The World’s exposure of their acts, and, unless restrained by the fear of further disclosures, are very likely to take Spanish vengeance upon all who have been seen to talk with The World correspondent. In this event I have arranged for the news to be sent to the Havana correspondent of The World, so that the public may still be kept Informed as to the results of an indiscreet word in Cuba.

The signatures naturally cannot be reproduced or the names be printed. For this the “pacficos” accepted the promise of The World, with the proviso that the proofs shall be open to the inspection of the State Department at Washington.

Boy Beaten with a Carbine.

The following is a translation of the simply worded account of the injured boy's father. It was taken down In Spanish, word by word, afterwards read to the man and then signed by him. It is also witnessed:

Coffee Plantation "San Francisco, Jurisdiction of Guanajay,

' Province of Pinar del Rio, May 21, 1896.

 By those presents I declare that yesterday, in the morning on the approach of the column of Col. Francis from Mariel to this place, 

Merced, they spoke to my son, eighteen years old, asking where the insurgents were, and when he answered that he did not know, one of the soldiers, in the presence of his chief, struck him five or six times with the barrel of his carbine, leaving him very badly injured. My son suffers much to-day.

A part of the column went to the house of my neighbor Domingo Guanche, and asked him if he knew where was the insurgent "hospital of blood” in the "Manigua." On his answering that he did not know, an office beat him with a cane which he carried, afterwards making him act as a guide.

Coming again to my house, the troops asked me If I knew of a hospital. I said I knew that there was one In Mariel and another In Guanajay, and then they beat me with a cane.

(Duly signed and witnessed; original document in Spanish In possession of The World.)

Both men mentioned—the lad’s father and his neighbor—bear the marks of a severe beating with a heavy stick.

The boy is seriously Injured. He cannot use his arms, and one of them feels as if it were broken. His back is badly strained and he may be permanently crippled. The carbine used was evidently heavy and swung with great force. The boy will be certainly disabled for months, perhaps for life.

The Insurgents aver that on the 20th there were no parties in the vicinity of La Merced. In this case the boy answered truly that he did not know. However, he would probably have answered the same if he had known. I asked him how he felt. He said:

“It is nothing. It is for Cuba.”

In connection with the reported Spanish massacre of wounded Cubans, the query of the officer about a “hospital de sangre," or place where some dozen or so badly wounded might be found, Is terribly significant.

The answer of Domingo Guanche is what is to be expected in respect to his countrymen wounded in fighting for his freedom and theirs.

The signer of the statement says naively, “And then they beat me with a cane." They naturally would be a little angry in view of the fact that the two hospitals mentioned are full of their own comrades. The Cuban showed some sense of humor and much nerve in this answer.

Slashed for Fun. Then Slaughtered.

The other case, that of murdered Jose Dominguez, Is a plain outrage without palliation. The man was sitting by the open window, his child on his lap, when one of the guerillas in mere wantonness leaned out of his saddle and slashed him on the arm.

Whether Dominguez was foolish enough to protest or whether the sight of blood aroused the inborn man-devouring instinct of the Spanish lion, I do not know. But it is certain that then the infantry took him from the house and killed him.

The following statement, signed by six villagers, is given literally in their own words:	

Town of Danes, May 23, 1890

We, with current signatures, do declare that the resident of Banes, D. Jose Dominguez, was killed by the Spanish troops in the town street of San Pedro about 8 o'clock in the morning of the 21st day of the present month while sitting in his house by the window. They gave him a machete cut on the arm, and then took him from the house and killed him, inflicting eleven bayonet strokes and leaving him covered by a jagua; for they said he was an insurgent.

We further declare that he was an honest man. and a laborer and had nothing to do with the war, nor had he dealings about it with any one. Neither had he arms or ammunition in his house and all that has been done to him 

An injustice has also been done to us and other honorable neighbors. The troops—the column of San Quintn—took from the houses clothes, books and whatever they wished.

For Justice we give this letter In Banes on tho above date.	(Six	signatures.)

Every one of the signers ss likely to prove his veracity with his life.

I also talked with many others of the villagers, and without exception all emphatically stated that Dominguez had absolutely nothing to do with thei more than having a cousin in the rebel ranks. It Is not even likely that the soldier who first cut him knew this. The whole thing is plainly a killing out of sheer love for It.

The murdered man leaves a widow and four children. The widow has moved from Banes.

The “jagua” mentioned as being put over the body was a slab of palm bark, evidently placed there as a satirical intimation that so much burial would be quite sufficient for a Cuban.

Insult Added to Injury.

Not satisfied with the actual killing, I have found in each of the Spanish outrages I have seen the same attempt to insult and desecrate the most dear and sacred feelings of the living Cubans.

That these do not in their frenzied anger retaliate upon the many Spanish prisoners they take is as wonderful as it is praiseworthy. It is a question, though, whether the Cubans can connized us or done one thing towards preventing Spain from wholesale murder?"

Puzzle In Popular Government.

I answered, of course, that although the Government might be a little slow in moving, the people of the United States have much sympathy for the Cubans and their cause. This seemed to puzzle him a little. After a moment he said:

"Why, I thought the United States was a republic."

"It Is," said I. 

"I don’t see how it can be," he retorted, "for certainly the Government of a republic must carry out the wishes of the people. You say the people of the United States wish to help us. Then why don’t their Government do it?"

I could not answer him.

Dominguez was burled by a friend shortly after his death. While engaged In digging the grave in the cane-field he was shot at by another passing column.

The grave can hardly be distinguished from the surrounding partly cut sugarcane, except for tho prickly cactus bushes placed upon it to guard the body from desecration by the "auras," or vultures that are plentiful In Cuba.

The group of Cubans is just of the appearance of the average small party of district revolutionists.


Spanish Spy Set Free.

In sharp contrast to the beaten men, the injured boy and the murdered Dominguez killed by twelve separate cuts, is the treatment by the Cubans of the Spanish spy, Juan Martinez. He was set at liberty before he was asked to write or declare anything, and the request for the letter which follows was made by The World correspondent:

Encampment, El Frances, May 23, 1896.

By the present document, I declare that on the 18th of the present month I was made prisoner In the court-yard of the sugar estate San Gabriel by two members of tho fuerzes libertadores de Cuba, commanded by Commandant Baldomero, Acosta, and that during the time I have been kept in the camp I have received good treatment and have been surrounded by cares and attentions and have been looked at with respect.

I declare also that I was captured in possession of arms and ammunition in country dress and that in military law I am considered as a spy.

I admit that the Cubans have the right of life over me, and that in setting me free I think very highly of their generosity.

(Signatures of Spanish spy and witnesses.)

The man was trembling with joy. His letter shows it. He was hardly “surrounded by cares and attentions" any more than lurk in the muzzles of a couple of carbines, but the poor devil evidently tried to get even with his generous captors by generous praise.

The man admitted to having been sent to locate tho Cuban camp near San Gabriel, and he has been set free to go where he will—even with a safe conduct that will pass him through the insurgent lines to his home in safety.

Acosta has done well. Instead of killing one Spaniard he has made one Cuban, or at least a friend to the Cubans, for if ever there was a grateful man this was he. He had reason to be. Beyond taking his arms and cartridges the Cubans did nothing to Martinez, exacted no promise from him than not to again bear arms against them.

The quotation "fuerzes libertadores de Cuba” means "the liberty forces of Cuba.” This term is always used by the revolutionists in speaking of their soldiers.

With the beating, injuring and killing of absolutely inoffensive "pacficos" on one side and the most generous surrender even of military rights for humanity’s sake on the other—the former the strong, the latter the weak— why should the United States hesitate to stop the reign of terror on this island at her gates. SYLVESTER SCOVEL.