WHAT CUBA MAY GAIN

Freed from Spain natural Wealth Would Develop.

HATRED RETARDS PROGRESS

Children Taught the Doctrine of Race Antipathy by Both Sides.

ABUNDANCE OF FOOD FOR A YEAR.

Land So Abundant It Not Need Tilling and Products Plentiful.

DISSATISFIED WITH THE CUBAN JUNTA

Insurgents Say Supplies Sent to the Eastern End of the Island Are Wanted.

(Copyright 1896, by the Proas Publishing Company, New York World.)

(Special Correspondence of The World.)

NEAR PUNTA BRAVA, Province of Havana, Cuba, June 3. — Tho work of plotting tho province of Havana into "zonas,” or military districts, which was begun in January by Gen. Maximo Gomez, has been completed by placing Commandante Baldomero Acosta in charge of the "zona of Mariel."

His district runs along the north coast from Mariel to Havana and extends back half the width of the island, which is here thirty miles wide on an average. The district contains the important towns of Guanajay, Mariel and Marlanoa, with the good-sized places Hoy, Colorado Caimito; Guayabal and Punta Brava.	

With the large bodies of Spanish troops in his district, Acosta is kept busy dodging with his little force of 300 men, only 150 of whom have serviceable arms.

In this district are fifteen sugar estates, of which but three, Toledo, Central Lucia and Valdespino, have modern machines. Two more have old-fashioned machinery, still fit for present use. Of these five estates able to make sugar at a profit, but one has had its machinery destroyed; leaving a good deal over four-fifths of tho sugar-producing machinery of the district untouched

One of the best equipped is the beautiful "Central Lucia" plantation of Perfecto Lacoste, an American citizen. His machinery has not been touched and but little of his sugar cane destroyed.

The remaining ten estates In the district, having obsolete machinery, would not have made their own sugar this year, even had there been no war.

The insurgents have destroyed the machinery of four. In each case the affair has been reported as wanton destruction of valuable property, while in most of the cases the owners have been actually glad to get rid of buildings and machinery that served only as an encumbrance to their estates, their cane being ground by any one of the five "centrals" or modern plants, being moved there by the plantation railroads.

Chance for Great Railway System.

These railroads form a network till over Western Cuba and with a prospect ff continued peace could easily be developed into a line system of public railways.

None of the plantations except “Toledo" has made sugar this year. The "'Toledo" plantation is just outside of Havana and  within reach of adequate military protection. The amount of sugar it has made has been, however, but a small percentage of its regular output.

All other agricultural interests, so far as I can learn, have not suffered materially. There are no uncultivated fields and the small farmers work right along as if there was no war In Cuba.

When the Cuban "army of invasion" first entered Western Cuba, on Its raid from the post, these timid people were wavering as to their loyalty to the Cuban cause.

On one hand was the natural love of freedom and wish for release from the grinding taxation of Spanish rule. On the other was the fear of being worse used by the hordes of savage negroes that the Spanish press repeatedly asserted formed the Cuban forces and would form tho Cuban Government.

When the farmers found that much more than half of the Cuban soldiers were white men, and when they felt the considerate treatment of the policy so firmly sustained by Gomez and Macea, they became active supporters of the Cuban cause.

Volunteer Spies on the Spanish.

They have acted as willing, unpaid informants as to the movements of the Spanish troops, and it is to this accurate and prompt information that the Cuban leaders owe, more than to all other things combined, their ability to successfully conduct tho purely defensive style of lighting, which, owing to their pitiable lack of ammunition, has been, so far of necessity the only way in which they could carry on the war in the hopes of success. How well they have done this is shown by their present, absolute control of all Cuba, except the cities.

Coming into a flat, open country un-known to them, gridironed with means of transportation and communication for the enemy and practicable for his artillery, Gomez and Maceo brought a handful of undisciplined men, recruited from a race not naturally brave. After six months of successful resistance to superior forces every province has its local forces. *

Maceo is keeping the Spanish army busy in the extreme western end of the island, and the revolution is undoubtedly  gaining ground every day. Considering the topographical conditions, history furnishes no more brilliant record of a purely defensive warfare.

The farmers have returned to their work, except, of course, the sugar employees, and crops are now in the ground sufficient to feed the country people and insurgents at least for another year.

Acosta’s forces have for a week been kept on the move by an unwonted activity on the part of several Spanish forces working in combination to drive him out of the district.

His camp was attacked May 20 by three columns—-one from the trocha at Guanazay, one from Mariel and one from Marianao. The Cubans were on the alert, and by a rapid movement passed between two of the columns, marched fifteen miles southeast and rested The firing was brief, and the only indications of loss of life were two “guerrillas," who were seen to fall from their horses.

The troops stayed near the deserted camp May 21, and the Cubans also rested, returning to their habitat May 22. The troops became restless again yesterday, and the Cubans pulled up stakes and are camping here in peace.

Average Five Cartridges.

They average about five cartridges to each of their 150 guns. Half of these are single-barrel fowling pieces. It is evident, therefore, that a “stand-up and knock-down” fight with even a single Spanish column would not be advisable. As it was two months ago, the cry from Cuba is to-day, “Cartridges; not men, but ammunition.”

Maceo Is said to be better supplied, but as no considerable expeditions are known to have landed In Pjnar del Rio, this is probably not so. The supplies sent to Eastern Cuba do not reach him. They stay there, where they are not especially needed.

Much dissatisfaction is felt by the Cubans in the field over the action in this respect of the Junta of New York, and if not already, or soon changed the policy of pending arms and ammunition to Eastern Cuba will cause serious trouble.

With a reasonably fast steamer supplies can easily be landed upon the north coast of either Matanzas, Havana or Pinar del Rio. There is really no good excuse for not setting cartridges to the men who need them; the men who will win this war, when it is won, in Western Cuba.

It is reported that Maceo has completed the military organization of Pinar del Rio, If so, every province of Cuba has its systematic arrangement of several small forces. The importance of this to the success of the revolution is great, although much depends upon the character of the district chiefs. If men of principle, they do much good in hanging thieves, collecting money for the Cuban cause, encouraging the farmers to continue their labors and recruiting men for Gomez, Maceo or other chiefs of active operations.

If unprincipled men, the "chiefs of Zone" can easily ruin the present bright prospects of the revolution by permitting lawlessness among their men, and by the extortion of money for their own ends. A few are reported to be doing the latter how. Investigation Is progressing.

Can Fight While Food Holds Out.

With the benefits accruing from the complete districting of the island, the Cuban revolutionists can, honestly, claim to be able to continue a defensive war as long as food holds out.

With the return of farmers to work really under Cuban [  ], their indescribably fertile lands are sure to stand all demands for food for both Spanish and Cuban armies as long as agricultural labor continues, and for a year or two after t ceases.

The fine flavored sweet potato gives two years constant yield from one planting. Cooking bananas, or “platanos," called the “bread of Cuba,” grow practically without cultivation, and the country abounds in fruits, many of which are very nutritious. The way in which the cattle supply has stood the enormous demands made upon it is remarkable.

The Cubans claim that although Western Cuba has but one-tenth the cattle that cover the hills of Central and Eastern Cuba, but ten per cent. of the cattle of the western part of the island have been used for food. Both forces have used meat without stint, and the Cuban method of distribution is unsystematic and wasteful in the extreme.

If Cubans and Spaniards have in six months used but 10 per cent., or say 20 per cent, of the meat supply of western Cuba, and if the balance of the island has ten times as large supplies yet to be used, it will be seen that neither Cubans nor Spaniards are apt to suffer from hunger until a time far beyond the natural length of the war.

Bread Riots May Be Looked For.

It is true that paralyzing the means of transportation has caused great misery already in the smaller towns and country immediately adjacent. It is also true that "bread riots” may be expected. They will act as an aid to the Cuban cause. Hunger will drive many a townsman into the "manigua" with the revolutionists. This statement is based, of course, on the supposition that the Cubans continue to control the means of transportation by rail.

The Cubans make no attempt to prevent the moving of food by the roads, but the farmers have been so misused by the Spanish columns that they are reluctant to haul food even to relieve their starving townspeople.

The railroads are stopped to prevent transportation of Spanish troops, which prevention is naturally justifiable, but for the acts of vandalism that have practically closed the roads to the towns the Spanish alone are responsible.

Should the present Government distribution of food grow to be an intolerable burden, It will be one of Spain’s own creation, as there is plenty of food in the country could the natural means of transportation for this purpose—the roads—be safely used.

Vast Natural Riches.

What a wonderfully rich land this is! It is literally alive with riches—animal, vegetable and mineral. The ground yields at a touch, yields so easily that for hundreds of years the tillers of the soil have never really had to “earn their bread by the sweat of their brow." This lazy life and the heat of the sun have not been conducive to the production of a race of fighters, and the Cuban leaders feel it now. However, in the light of this fact, what victories the unarmed Cubans have won appear more remarkable.

With modern machinery and modern brain,, no one can estimate the vast production this garden spot might be made to yield.

Could there be a surety of continued peace in Cuba, American capital could not find in the world a quicker or larger return than this island, geographically really a part of the United States. and but seventy miles from Florida.

The [  ] of the foreign trained Cubans claim that the annual amount of money taken to Spain out of Cuba in taxes

church and State, and In the quasi-authorized peculation in office that will be found to be universal In Spanish colonial government, foots up seventy-five or eighty millions of dollars—some go as high as one hundred millions. Knocking off a liberal per cent, for natural exaggeration, Spain's revenues are fifty millions annually. Though not one-half of this would appear upon the books, yet it is a moderate estimate.

There are not many over a million "creoles," or native-born Cubans, on the island. They naturally "pay the freight," which, therefore, amounts to $50 per capita.

What a wonder of fertility must an island be whose people can pay $50 per capita a year in taxes without working! That the country people do not have to work hard is patent to every one who has ridden through Cuba.

With good government Cuba lies open to American capital. Spanish rule Is admittedly not "good government." Cuban rule, if as corrupt, would not be so crippling, for, as a brilliant young Cuban said to me, "the money will stay in Cuba"

Opening for American Capital.

One thing, however, can be emphatically stated. There will never be continued peace in Cuba as long as the Spanish people rule It. This may be amply demonstrated by a glance over the history of Cuba or of Spanish rule In general, and also by many fixed conditions at present existing. But one of these, really the culmination of them all, will I quote at present.

It Is the inborn hatred that the members of one people have for the other. Even should the Spanish Government turn squarely back on its principles and traditions of centuries and establish and maintain every reform possible in Cuba this hatred would still be alive, at least for a couple of generations, for it is savagely Instinct in the blood of both peoples.

Insurrections would still continue to occur in isolated portions alone, perhaps, but still of sufficient effect to keep affairs unsettled. On the Cuban side this hatred is shown in their folk songs, In the everyday talk of even the peaceable farmers, in their poetry, in their views on everything Spanish, whether good or bad.

Teachings of the Nursery.

It muy be accounted for b centuries of Spanish misrule and the fact that there is hardly a mother in Cuba, in Central and Eastern Cuba at least, Who docs not tell her children of a relative who has died while fighting In one of the many insurrections, or has been murdered or maltreated by "Los brutos Espanoles" (those Spanish brutes).

If the Spaniards win this war the mothers of Western Cuba may, with equal reason, join with those of the rest of Cuba in nursery relations of their people’s wrongs. Such a deep-lying and early instilled hatred of the race itself can never be soothed by governmental reforms.

The Spanish view of Cubans, as being merely a superior sort of animal, has been so often and so recently shown as really not to need comment. However, to show how the Spanish children are trained in a consistent manner, I will quote a copy of a letter made three months ago, but not then used, as. at that time it did not seem possible that it could be a fair sample of the training of the children of a nation. Subsequent events have totally corrected the impression. The use of the letter may be pardoned, I hope, in the light of serving to prove a vital fact.

Gen. Gomez captured a mail train In January. Its letters were opened in the hope of finding information as to the movement of Spanish troops. There was a letter from a Spanish major-general's wife to her husband, then and now occupying one of the highest posts in Cuba. Tho family la highly cultivated. At the end of the letter was a postscript by a child of not more than twelve years. This postscript was handed to me as indicative of Spanish views upon Cubans. It read in a childish scrawl as follows:

Child Wants Gomez's Ears for Toys

“Dear Papa! Oh! Won't it be nice when you are captain-general and get $100,000 a year and we have a palace to live in! And please hurry lip and catch Gomez and Maceo. Please bring sister and me Gomez's cars and Maceo’s yellow belly.”

With sentiments such as these in cultivated children's minds, what must be the mental mould of men, especially the densely ignorant Spanish rank and file? The answer lies in the mangled bodies buried at Playa Salado, the murdered farmer at Banes, the proved outrages at Guateo, San Pedro, Caimito and many other towns, with the hundreds of unknown brutalities perpetrated by Spanish troops in country Cuba.

With missionaries in Africa, China and India teaching Christianity and peace to ignorant heathens, what aro the people of the United States, through their Government, going to do for Cuba, but four-hours' cruiser speed away, bleeding under the atrocious hand of the most heathen civilized power that ever desecrated the name of Christianity or of civilization?

Spain is daily guilty of worse excesses than ever characterized "the unspeakable Turk.” Moderate language cannot be used for indescribable atrocities.

Humanity demands that the most civilized power on earth should say “stop,” and back it up, too.

The United States has given its President the power. Will he use it?

SYLVESTER SCOVEL.