  Real Life in Cuba
  The machete in Cuba is put to more uses than any other Implement in the world, not excepting the hairpin.
  It is the Cuban baby's first (and only) toy.
  The Cuban boy chops kindling with it.
  When a Cuban marries he cuts up a couple of palm trees for four posts and a roof-tree; another variety of the same tree furnishes bark for the walls and thatch for the roof, with string to bind it withal. The result is a house. And all at the cost of one machete and ten days' toll.
  Cuban families are large. Their average site is about twelve persons, from the grandmother to the baby.
  Cubans live out of doors, which is really about the same thing whether they stay in the house or not
  It takes a lot of food for such large and growing families.
  The heavy sword-knife again comes in handy, especially if the father doesn't like to work hard.
  One machete stroke is all that is required to gather a bunch of bananas or, as they are called, "platanons."
  This fruit when green is cooked in a dozen ways, and with sweet potatoes forms the principal food of nine-tenths of the campesinos or country working people.
  When they want meat the machete again comes in as slaughtering axe, "skinning knife" and all the other implements of the shambles.
  The machete is used for everything from an axe to a toothpick.
  Everyday practice from childhood up makes the Cuban wonderfully dextrous, and when he turns his edge against men, bone and sinew offer no existence. At Mai Trempo 260 Spanish soldiers were killed by one machete's stroke. It was a ghastly eight.
  The Cuban farmer, from the climate and non-necessity for hard work, is not naturally brave. If he were this war would be over now.
  No troops in the world can hit so hard and quick with the sword, and the Spanish officers are badly scared by the "machete idea.
  When the Cubans actually get started in a hand-to-hand fight they usually win.
  In times of peace food costs practically nothing.
  Gen. Gomes says: "These people don't have to work the soil does it for them." It is rich beyond description.
  Sweet potatoes grow two years from one planting; bananas once planted produce forever, and there are sugar estates that have annually cut cane since the shoots were planted forty years ago.
  The sugar plantations are large enterprises, and Chinese labor is used on many of them.
  The greeter part of Cuban labor is used in growing tobacco.
  Fields of tobacco are seldom over an acre large. The owner makes money enough from this bit of land to buy such other supplies as the soil doesn't give him.
  These are coffee, sugar, salt and coarse cloth.
  The cloth is made up by the women on modern sewing machines.
  Every house contains a sewing machine of modern make, but the ploughs are of the pattern of 2000 B. C.
  Oxen draw the ploughs, and the iron point on a stick cannot lift over six inches of soil at a furrow.
  It takes a team of oxen, a Cuban plough and a Cuban four days to pre- pare for tobacco half an acre of land.
  It has to be gone over six times.
  Cuban women smoke more than the men. Itis easier for them to get at the source of supplies. This is the little loft made by half a dozen poles under the roof, where is stored the leaf tobacco.
  This the women roll into cigars when required.
  The Cubans are invariably, hospitable. You ride along on one of their little ambling horses and the alleged road may take you right into the front door of a farmhouse.
  It would go right through the back door if there was one. As there isn't, the road meanders round the house, loses itself in the clearing, and when you want to continue your Journey they furnish you with any one of a dozen grimy little urchins to show you where the road starts again.
  You are Invariably asked to dismount, the colloquial Cuban being. "Will you take coffee?" and "Do you wish to smoke?
  The block coffee, served in small cups, is rich, and the Cubans do not sell their best tobacco.
  From six to ninety-six years of age everybody smokes.
  When the "good days" have been passed with the good manners to be found in every Cuban household, and it relapses into us accustomed ways, the attenuated old grandmother tucks away a big loosely rolled cigar between her toothless gums and contentedly puffs away.
  The children, girls and boys alike, clamor at the table for the cigars rolled thereon.
  Once a young woman finished making a big cigar. More carefully rolled
the table. A toddling baby girl, so small her head was inches below its top, grabbed it.
  How old is she?"
  Six years this safra (sugar season).
  Isn't smoking bad for her?"
  The mother shrugged her shoulders and said, qulen sabe? (who
knows?)
  Hospitality sometimes goes to embarrassing lengths. You ask for a light. Usually a bit of burning wood is brought out in the bowl of a spoon.
When particularly polite the woman takes your cigar, bites off the end, puffs a good light on it and then courteously hands it back ready for use.
  They don't bathe much in Cuba.
  Half the children never got a wash between rainy seasons. These are about four months apart. Then it rains every day and involuntarily the inhabitants make up for lost time.
  When it rains in Cuba you are bound to get wet. You wonder where all the water comes from. Ordinary mackintoshes are of no use. The best thing would be a diving-bell, but that would be too much weight for your horse.
  You tell your host you wish to take a bath. In Western Cuba there are very few rivers or streams and wells are the sole water supply.
  You say: I would like to take a bath. He looks at you inquiring,
You say it again. He secs the point and dives inside to talk to his wife.
  She unlocks the family chest and appears with a towel.
  The washtub is often made by digging out a solid block of cedar. It is dragged into the surrounding bushes and a couple of boys work the well for water.
  Then you are struck dumb on being tended good castile soap. You find it everywhere in Cuba. It is about the only good thing that Spain makes the Cubans use, and they don't use this often.
  Your host attends you. When you commence to disrobe he still attends you. In fact, he stays right with you until you are done.
  A bath is an important affair in country Cuba.
  Lord Randolph Churchill's son visited the insurgents, and one of them said: "1 think he is a little cracked. He has to have a bath every day.
SYLVESTER SCOVEL.
