CUBA'S PRESIDENT QUIT.

Crisis in Government of the Budding Republic Suddenly Brought On.

FRICTION BETWEEN HIGH OFFICERS.

Insult to Cisneros Came Very Near Causing Bloodshed at His Headquarters.

BUT DIFFERENCES ARE ADJUSTED.

From November On Cubans Will Push Things, and, if Need Be, Reduce the Inland to Ashes.

(Copyright 1896, by the Press Publishing Company, New York World.)

(Special Correspondence of The World.)

Near Havana, Cuba, Aug. 16.

Couriers have Just arrived with news of a crisis in the provisional government of the Republic of Cuba.

There had been much friction for months between several high officers. One or two unpopular promotions were made by President Cisneros (the Marquis of Santa Lucia), and opinion was also divided upon sundry questions of internal policy.

The climax came July 22, when the headquarters quartermaster spoke rather plainly to the President. Col. Mandalay, acting Secretary of War, resented this and drew his revolver, supposedly to avenge the insult to his Chief. The quartermaster also had supporters, and for an instant bloodshed seemed inevitable.

But the venerable President, aided by the cooler heads present, quickly restored a semblance of peace. The old gentleman’s feelings, however, were deeply wounded and he immediately announced his resignation.

All that night the provisional government was in great danger of ignominious dissolution, but the next morning all complaints were heard, differences were adjusted and President Cisneros withdrew his resignation. Trouble is over, for the present at least, and the wheels of government are running smoothly.

Loss o Maceo and Zayas Keenly Felt.

Official Intelligence just arrived confirms the report of the death at Soma del Gato of Major-Gen. Jose Maceo, brother of Lieut.-Gen. Antonio Maceo. A proclamation Issued from the Government press declares that Maceo’s death is a great loss, and orders appropriate mourning for him.

Gen. Zayas, killed recently near Quivican, was of even more importance to the Cuban cause. He was actively operating in the very vortex of the war— Havana Province.

Reassignments of commands made necessary by the loss of the two generals are being made as rapidly as possible. It is hoped here that either Serafin Sanchez or Major Rodriquez will be sent west to take the place of Gen. Zayas.

Havana Province is rather disorganized. There is Insurgent force enough, but It is divided into so many small bodies that practically no resistance can be offered to even a small Spanish column. By organizing, say three strong Cuban columns from available material, small Spanish columns and cavalry detachments may be frequently corralled and defeated, while all the Spanish columns can be kept constantly upon the march, with a high death rate from fevers and dysentery.

In Pinar del Rio Province Maceo has been unmolested for almost two months. There has been only one small skirmish, and that of his own seeking.

Spanish Inactivity Explained.

The Insurgent theory is that the Spanish columns no longer make combined attacks upon tho Cuban fighting General in his hilly positions, because they know he is well supplied with cartridges. A stronger reason for the present Spanish inactivity is that Gen. Weyler probably does not wish to expose his men in the sickly season, nor operate actively until the arrival of the expected 40,000 troops from Spain.

Both sides are likely to spend the next two months In preparation for the dry season's campaign. From November on the Cubans will be aggressive. Property is to be further destroyed and the trocha set at naught.

Spain, will have at least 200,000 soldiers with which to make the sugar estates impregnable and the trocha uncrossable. But, Judging > from last winter's campaign, and the greatly improved equipment of the Cubans, Gomez and Maceo will carry out their plans.

If so, 1897 will find no Industry on the island, save some slight labor in cultivating vegetables. All, or nearly all, the valuable sugar machinery and buildings will be in ruins, and Spain will own nothing in Cuba except bare ground. 

Hard Fighting Next Winter.

The winter campaign will necessarily be one of constant, sharp fighting, In which many more lives will be lost than last winter. In the absence of foreign Intervention the killing of peaceable people is certain to greatly Increase.'

The winter is almost sure to result In a gain, for the Cubans, although at a tremendous loss to Cuba. As a whole, the country people are ardent sympathizers with the revolution, and aid it substantially. The Cuban land-owners also have enlisted In the cause, and It may safely be said that not 5 per cent, of the native-born, population of - Cuba favors Spain.

This almost universal support, the 50,000 revolutionists In arms, the Improved efficiency of the Cuban forces, the great Advantages the Insurgents have In the difficult hills and dense forests of the plains—their principal considerations, as well as the minor advantages of food, acclimation, horses, patriotic purpose and good leaders, promise that the Cubans will finally gain their independence, though, unaided, Cuba will not be free for years.

Campaigns of destruction, therefore, are, perhaps, the best for the still insufficiently equipped patriots to carry on. Their results will come slowly, and when the Spaniards finally quit the island the Republic of, Cuba will be a ruined island, The insurgent leaders think that, so rich Is the soil. Under a liberal government Cuba will build herself up In five years far beyond the highest point Under Spanish rule. They say that most of the materials for reconstruction must come from the United States, naturally at a great profit to the American people.

Spanish	Rule	Doomed

Spanish rule in, Cuba Is doomed. It is .dying a slow death. Millions In money : Is being wasted. Thousands of lives are being lost in the skirmishes and hospitals. Other thousands of innocent lives will be sacrificed to Spanish ferocity and Cuba will be a wilderness.

All this destruction of life and property Is useless. It can be prevented by the Intervention of the United States. Lives, money and .property would be saved to' Spain; lives, money and property would be saved to Cuba; American Interests In Cuba would be protected, and a new opening would be made for American capital.

Intervention Is demanded by every practical consideration.
SYLVESTER SCOVEL.