
GEN. PANDO'S MESSAGE TO THE WORLD

Signed Statement from Marshal Blanco’s Chief of Staff on Spain's New Policy

HE’S A GOOD WRITER AS WELL AS SOLDIER

Sylvester Scovel, The World's War Correspondent, Again Arrested but Speedily Released on his

Word of Honor.

GREAT CONCESSIONS BY SPAIN,

BUT NOT MADE IN WEAKNESS

Governor-General Will Be "Generous With the Repentant, but Inexorable Toward the 

the Impenitent Traitors.


(Copyright, 1897, by the Press Publishing Company, New York World.)

(Special Cable Despatch from a World Staff Correspondent.)

HAVANA, Cuba, Nov. 14.—-The World correspondent was arrested immediately on his return to Havana and politely conducted before Judge Berual to show cause why he should not be sent to prison for at least six years, pay a fine if $600 for. having procured a passport with another’s name and used such “false credula" in a forbidden trip to Gen. Gomez’s camp last winter which trip ended in the jail at Sancti Spiritus.

While nominally under arrest at the Palace to-day I met Gen. Pando, the chief of Marshal Blanco’s military staff and spokesman. This genial Spanish

Lieutenant-General unbent sufficiently to give to The World the following

authorized statement, which has been translated and retranslated, so that it

might exactly express the General's dictation.

The original is in Spanish and is in Gen. Pando's own handwriting. The literal English translation 

has lost the smoothness of its author’s phrases.

The World Correspondent—“General.As you are in union with gens. Blanco and Martinez Campos and one of the leaders of most prestige in the Cuban war, will you please give me your opinion upon the solution which you esteem as the most convenient in the Cuban problem?"

The General—“I am a military man who in the exercise of duty is a ‘Swiss in obedience.’ I am identified with the Government and. with the illustrious Gen. Blanco because both’ represent tolerance without debility and energy without cruelty. I have always believed that policy is a factor in the plans of every general-ln-chief and the policy of to-day compatible with an energetic military action consists in being generous with the repentant and inexorable with the impenitent traitors This is the policy of the Government and of Gen. Blanco, which I propose to follow, seconding (it) with the loyalty which has always characterized my public actions.

“I cannot, nor do I wish to, concur with the foolishness of making declarations, but without wishing that it should be taken as a profession of faith, I should say that I have always been inspired with sympathy toward

administrative autonomy of our Basque provinces. This opinion is not new one for me, because in the Spanish Cortes I have always favored the greatest decentralization in administrative colonial functions—which is not surprising because being (I was) educated according to the canons of our military Koran, the ‘Ordenanza’ (Spanish army regulations), In it which all military men have learned what is administrative autonomy in bodies which are put into motion, military organizations, be they companies,

battalions or brigades.

“ It is a very grave error to suppose that the political concessions of the Spanish Government have been given to an enemy to secure peace. They are given to the loyal and to the repentant; but for the incendiaries, the dynamiters, Spain reserves the action of force, energetic and without temporizing measures. "Cuba, then, to avoid being a chaos or the theatre of bloody strife ought to remain Spanish, because only by belonging to Spain can be guaranteed Its commercial relations with the civilized world, especially so when

the Isthmus of Panama shall be no longer an Isthmus, or the two oceans

joined in some other manner.



The United States ere more interested than any other nation in Cuba remaining under the Spanish flag, because they prefer to assure the prosperity of their commerce to making enemies of Europe.

' "About independence let us not speak, because no person of same judgment ought to. take into consideration such a hypothesis."

No other Spaniard In Cuba understands the situation better * than does Gen. Pando, who =for sixteen years of peace and of war has held many civil and military posts of importance in the island. He was made the adopted son of Santiago de Cuba, the most Cuban city in Cuba, and he knows real needs of the-land.



What his military policy is to be I shall send in another despatch.

Gen. Blanco is making strong efforts to counteract Weyler's mistakes.

The proclamation of Nov. 12, if obeyed, means much more food in the country neat the towns. , It directs that no more property shall be destroyed by the troops, in the country, and especially orders that the newly sloughed fields near the towns shall be respected. The only restriction is that [ ] fields near the towns shall have openings or gates on each side in order to allow movement of troops.

Under this proclamation the reconcentrados able to work have improved the opportunity to raise food for themselves and their friends.

SYLVESTER SCOVEL.
