SCOVEL RISKED LIFE.

"It's a Miracle They Didn't
    Shoot Him," It was
        Said in Havana.
        
JOURNEY ENDING IN JAIL.

World's War Correspondent
    Tells of His Perilous 
        Trip to Gomez

MANY THRILLING INCIDENTS.

Shrewdly Eluded the Soldiers Set to
    Watch Him on the 
        Start.

HARDSHIPS IN THE CUBAN BUSH.

After Fulfilling His Mission He Was
    Innocently Betrayed 
        By Friends.

(Copyright, 1897 by the Press Publishing Company,
    New York World.)
(By Courier and Express from the World's War
    Correspondent.)
        Caleboose No. 1, Prison of Sancti Spiritus,
            Santa Clara Province,
                Cuba, Feb 20, 1897.

    Casilda, Cuba, consisted on Jan. 19 of 
two dozen houses and half a dozen forts. 
    It had two dilapidated piers.  One 
one leaned against a Yankee schooner, the 
other had itself up near two Spanish
gunboats.
    I had been told that two Spanish
soldiers were detailed to see that the 
"Yankee" took the next morning's boat
back to Havana. 
    In the shadow of the sea end of the 
pier house was a dilapidated little 
fishing dory about eleven feet long. I
walked the length of the pier repeatedly.
Then, at the end of one trip, I
got into the crazy little craft and gave 
a strong shove.
    Then I squatted in the stern and 
listened for the rifle crack I felt was
sure to come. But it didn't.
    
    Improvised World Despatch Boat
    
    THe wind blow enough off shore to 
give the little boat steerageway, and 
slowly drifted through the fishing fleet
anchored in the harbor, which finally
concealed the "World dispatch boat."
    I hoisted an apology for a sail and
made for a point of the coast that 
kindly reached out to meet me. 
Stepping into the bushes I found myself in 
the field against, clad in a derby hat, 
store clothes, and thin shoes. Some
dollars, a pair of field glasses in my 
mackintosh pocket, and a flask completed my 
campaign outfit. 

  Trying Trip through the Bush. 

    The country was a vast salt marsh,
interlaced with mango bushes. Every yard 
had to be fought for. Twenty-
two hours after the start a house
appeared, and I dropped into a chair,
"played out." Next to crossing Weyler's
Trocha, through the Majana swamp, it
was the hardest work I have done in 
Cuba.
    It is easy to find rebels anywhere
outside of the town of Cuba- you can find
plenty of them in the towns, too, if you 
know how to ask for them - and it was
only a matter of a day or two to get
horses and guides. 
    Starting out Jan. 22 from the coast, we
- a guide, a servant and myself- dodged
guerillas for twenty miles of heavily
sugar lands, stuck northwest through
the mountains and reached Manicarauga
Valley on the 24th. 
    Here was encamped the man who has 
taken Maceo's place as chief of Western
Cuba, Gen. Jose Maria Rodriguez. He was
waiting for Gen. Weyler's masses, 
then in Matanzas province, to come up 
into Santa Clara's difficult topography, 
so that he might pass them and continue 
on westward with the bulk of the 
Spanish army behind him. 
    Gen Gomez is a hard man to find. Last
winter 100,000 Spanish troops in a flat 
country not larger than Rhode Island 
couldn't find him. That was because the
"pacificos" never knew anything.
    But these same pacificos located him,
for me on Jan. 24 within ten miles of 
where I found him, after 100 miles of 
riding, not quite three days later. Each of 
my party wore out a horse a day. We 
went from prefectura to prefectura, 
changing horses , by authority of Gen.
Rodriguez, whenever necesary.
    
    In the Cuban Government Camp.
 
    A day and two nights were spent at 
the camp of Gomez and the Cuban 
Government. 
    The official refusal of any reform short
of independence and the counter
proposal to buy Cuba's freedom were 
secured and sent to The World by courier.
Then on Jan. 28 I started for the nearest
point to take ship for Havana - Tunis.
    Zaza is a little fortified way station
about six miles north of Tunas and 
about the same distance east
of the nearest sugar plantation of Pojabo.
The owner of Pajabo is  loyal 
Spaniard, known as Don Pancho. I decided
to present myself to him as a buyer of 
old copper and metals. So I changed 
my big horse for a scrubby little brute, 
parted from my Cuban companions and 
ambled into Pojabo. 
    I explained how I had come
cross-country from Trinidad, mentioning
casually the number of forts I had passed. 
Of course, Don Pancho supposed I had 
a military pass. We talked copper, and
I proceeded to beat him down in orthodox style. 
     I now hold an option on all the old copper
of Pojabo for "delivery upon the
declaration of peace or permit 
from the Spanish Government."
    I persuaded Don Pancho to accompany 
me to Tuhas, where there was some 
more copper.
    Approaching Zaza on Feb. 5, Don
Pancho and I saw that the little place
was full of guardia civil cavalry-
Spain's crack corps. Things looked 
squally. But my Spanish friend was
known to them all, and I rode into town 
safely under the protecting wing of his
good reputation without being halted or
questioned.
    I talked copper with another 
plantation owner until the train came. Don
Pancho and I steped aboard. 
    From insurgent headquarters the Sunday
[Begin Second Column]
news that Spain was willing to grant
reforms to Cuba had spread like wildfire, 
and despite my protests the 
Cubans who accompanied me back to the 
coast poured tales of Spain's weakness
into the ears of credulous pacificos
and said I was a "special deputy from
the United States Government."
    This had been told to Gen. Lague,
who had given orders that all roads and
trains should be carefully watched for
"an American without a pass."
    That was why Lieut. Casa de Val and 
a sergent stopped in front of my seat 
in the car. I handed out my railroad
ticket, but that didn't seem to suit, so I
produced a stamped and signed official
document indicating that I was Harry 
Williams, a business man of Havana.
    Casa de Val asked: 
    "Where's your pass?"
    My explanation that I hadn't thought
about getting one was not sufficient.
Obeying a significant gesture I followed 
him into the last car of the train filled 
with iron-featured Guardia Civiles, each 
man with his Mauser rifle between his 
knees.
    A whispered conversation began. I
fancy the soldiers didn't know I 
understood Spanish. At first they said the 
"--- Yankee" ought to be shot 
and then he should be shot. 

    Propitiating His Captors.

    I gave them three pocketfuls of cigars 
and then sent after the lieutenant. He
came back into the guard car angry.
He had discovered that I had no 
baggage.
    We sat down in the compartment
reserved for officers and I talked against
time amid the shuffling of rifle butts, 
muttered curses and scowling faces.
I told the lieutenant what good soldiers
all Spanieards are and expaitiated upon
the fine style in which the Guardia
Civiles fulfill their delicate and difficult 
task as detective-soldiers.
    The lieutenant unbent and treated me
with much civility. He said he had been
ordered to look out after an American
without a pass. 
    
    A Miracle that He Was Not Shot.

    That order of Gen. Luque's, although
it led to my capture, saved my life, for 
if the Guardia Civiles had discovered
themselves that I was a "man from 
the woods," they undoubtedly would have
shot me. Indeed, a very high Spanish
authority in Havana said, when told the
details of my arrest, "Well, it's a miracle
they didn't shoot me."
    Arriving in Tunas, I was handed over
to the military commandant, who
immediately communicated by wire with
Gen. Luque, in Sancti Spiritus.
    After three long hours Gen. Luque's 
answer came. I was to be taken to
Sancti Spiritus the next morning. I was
kept over night, two soldiers being on
guard, and breakfasted the next 
morning by the Count de Sersundi, a Spanish
officer, who is a Military Judge at 
Cienfuegos, and happened to be in Tunas on
leave.  He lived in the United States
for eight years and speaks English fluently.
    Through his courtesy I was provided
with Spanish Civil Code and thus
enabled to demand my rights.
    Arriving in Sancti Spiritus Feb. 6, I 
was escorted through the streets to the 
great edification of the omnipresent
small boy, taken before Gen Luque and 
then turned over the civil authorities
and placed in the town jail.
    The United States Consular agent,
Rafael Madrigal, had been energy itself
in looking after my interests. He has 
not only done his full duty as a 
representative of the United States, he has 
even done more for me than I would 
have a right to expect from an intimate 
friend.
    Consul-General Lee has also done
everything in his power.
    
    How the Cell Looks.
 
    My cell is large, dry and well lighted.
A large window opens into the outside air, 
and the opposite door lies directly across
a clean corridor from another large
window that opens into a little vegetable
garden where during certain hours I am 
allowed to exercise.
    The walls are spotlessly kalsomined.
Extending four feet up from the floor is 
a "wainscoting" of brilliant black 
asphaltum varnish that gives a handsoome
finish to the cell and discourages
insects.
    From the floor to the apex of the
smooth cedar ceiling is fully twenty feet.
The prisons is a model of neatness in all
its parts.
    The Alcaide of Sancti Spiritus, Marco 
Garcia, and the Warden of the jail.
Antonio Canto, take pride in their 
charge.
    It has the reputation of being the
best-kept penal institution in Cuba, and 
yet Gen. Weyler shuffled through it 
yesterday morning with a sour scowl
on his heavy-joweled countenance
without one word of communication. 
    
Weyler Glowered on the Prisoner.

    It probably isn't policy, but it is
truth, to say that any Valeriano Wyler y
Nicolau Marquis of Teneriffe and 
Captain and Governor-General of Cuba, &c.,
has as ferocious a face supported by as 
sloppy a form as was ever borne by a 
man of his titles.
    It is hardly fair for me to rank of
Gen. Weyler thus, for as yet he has not
curtailed any of my privlieges, but the 
vivid remembrance of the butchered
farmers I saw in Finar del Rio and a
first sight at him compel me to describe
the harmony between his actions and 
his looks.
    Good lawyers have been provided for
me in Santa Clara, where my "case"
should come up for trial in a week or
so. If there is justice in Cuba I should
be cleared very quickly, indeed. 
    I have never directly or indirectly 
aided the insurgents. I have never 
carried so much as a large knife in the 
shape of arms.
    I have never been appointed adjutant, 
complimentary or otherwise, on any 
Cuban staff. I have never acted as 
such and I have never been a Cuban
courier. I have never come to Cuba on
a filibustering expedition.
    I have strictly adhered to the plainly
marked out duties of a war correspondent.
    All of this is conclusively proved by
my actions and reputation here and 
is emphsized by several captured
documents now in the possession of the Spanish
authorities in Havana, and other Cuban
papers now in my possession.
    I was almost strung-up last February
by a band of "plateados," or robbers 
that I could easily have stood off with a 
good six-shooter, and the newspapers of 
Havana itself printed the affair as "an
attempt to hang an unarmed American
citizen by Cuban savages."
    I am profoundedly greatful for the 
powerful efforts that I am informed are 
being made for my release.
    SYLVESTER SCOVEL