
Rebels Never More Hopeful,

Scovel Cables to the World

He is the First Newspaper Correspondent to Reach
the Insurgent Lines Near Havana

HE TELLS, NOT RUMORS, BUT WHAT HE SEES.

The Provinces Near Havana as Full of Rebels as Before
Maceo’s Death; None Are surrendering

SPANISH CONTINUE TO SLAY NON-COMBATANTS.

(By EXPRESS COURIER STEAMER AND SPECIAL CABLE
FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT THE FiELD.)

IS THE FIELD NEAR ARROYO ARENA. PROVINCE OF HAVANA, Jan. 4.—I have been fortunate enough to get into Havana, 
get out of it again, and to find an insurgent force, all in just twelve hours. This place is six miles from San Pedro, where Maceo is reported to have been killed. 

It is hot true that either Pinar del Rio or Havana Provinces have been pacified." The insurgents are not thinking of making peace. They are more active and hopeful than ever.

The observations of The World correspondent who accompanied the Spanish troops with a pass granted by Gen. Weyler misstated the true situation in this respect: He saw only the portions of the province which are deserted by insurgents, chiefly for the lack of food.

6,000 Rebels Very Active.

There never were but 6,000 rebels m Pinar del Rio province. They are still
there. Gen. Weyler at the head of 30,000 Spanish troops did not conquer them.
All reports from Spanish towns or forts are utterly untrustworthy. Maceo
never fought in heavy columns. His bands were always scattered. He never had more than 200 men with him. His plan was to harass tease and tire out the enemy. 

I find that the situation here looks better for the insurgents to-day than when I left Pinar del Rio last August. Even the Spaniards admit that none of the insurgents have surrendered.

Scene of Maceo’s Death

I hope to be on the scene to-morrow of Maceo's death if the seven Spanish
troops are not perniciously active an d the Cubans are energetic. I rode for [?} weeks with the same force of I insurgents under Baldonero Acosta [eight] months ago, and over this same ground. Accosta’s cavalrymen are positively fat. Their horses, too, look better fed.

From these appearances at least it does not seem that the insurgents in this district ravished by the bloody San Quintn battalion and twelve separate guerilla organizations are being much harrassed.

Col. Cirujeda, the slayer of Maceo, is the batallion commander. He is really a very energetic officer, and keeps his infantry and cavalry on the march constantly. The ease with which the Cubans seem to have avoided his “combinations” 
proves that they have improved in what was always their strongest point—ability to keep and get away.

Still Killing Pacificos

The Pacifico victims of the San Quintin batallion and local guerillas have been printed in The World. Both the peaceable farmers and insurgents state that since then these forces have kept fully up to their record.


The people there live almost under the shadow of a Spanish fortified town. They are apt to be very non-committal as to any acts reflecting on their nearby neighbors. And yet, they have given me affidavits in the Spanish language certifying to the absolutely unprovoked killing of four men, and a boy done to, death within one mile, of this house.

They also tell how the guerrillas ‘‘gave the machete” to eight or ten unarmed insurgents at various times. They do not complain of this, but they do keenly resent the killing of peaceable people, who are known to have had nothing to do with the war.

Three brothers, Jose, Cornelio and Pablo Govin, thirty-six, thirty and twenty-eight years respectively, owned some cattle near Punta Brava. Obtaining permission from the military authorities, they drove the beeves to
Havana to sell them.  They met  party of Col. Cirujedas guides—the same ones who are reported To have taken The articles from Maceo’s 'body." A Spanish soldier said to the brothers: “You have two bachelor brothers in the bush. You are bad people—mala gente.” Whereupon the soldiers took them to the road of Rio Hondo and stabbed them to death. Then they hacked them. One brother had five and each of the other two had three children. None of the little ones is over nine years old and all are almost starving.

Spanish Guerillas Assassins.

This butchery occurred within four days of another instance. On Dec. 14 a
single insurgent galloped by the house of Herreray Gonzalez, three miles
north of Punta Brava. Following close after came the Juerillas of La Sisa
and some of the Arroyo Arena band. The son, Eginion Herrera, heard the
noise, opened the door, looked out, and dropped dead with a Spanish bullet
through his heart. He is buried In the cemetery of Elemo. All the people
Hereabouts know about it. And in the same ground lies fourteen-year-old
Isidoro .Herrara y Oarora, also murdered in cold blood. The boy was hauling
the family water barrel, using a yoke of oxen. A mile off there was some
firing.	

Affidavits for The "World.

Then two guerrillas of Pizarro came along and put two balls through the boy's chest and a machete through his throat. They had been unable to catch the insurgents. This happened at San Mauritius Farm, three-quarters of ft league from Arroyo Arena.


The farmers that sign the affidavits now in possession of The World correspondent do so knowingly at the risk of their lives. If this letter should be
captured in its passage through three searching lines of sentinels on entering Havana, if the courier is held up on the road by marching columns, or if any enemy should know that I have stayed at this house and should say so to
the guerilla force whose bugle is just now sounding the 8 o’clock call of "Silencio,” the signers would be silenced as sure as the Spanish peasant lad soldiers are now swinging their hammocks for sleep.

Testimony given knowingly under such circumstances is pretty apt to be ' truthful. The affidavits as to each of the murders quoted simply give the name. date, place, and state that the victims were genuine pacficos. They are to be sent to The World. The signatures naturally must be printed, but in common with the hundreds of other signed and witnessed proofs of Spanish barbarity in the possession  of The World they are freely offered to the State Department or to the President of the United States.

All the Farmers Help the Rebels.

The order published by Gen. Gomez last winter urging the farmers to raise foodstuffs for the revolutionists seems to have been well obeyer, al east in this part of the province. All the farms I have passed through are growing corn and vegetables.

No tobacco whatever is being planted or cultivated, although this is quite a tobacco district. The heavily guarded plantation, Toledo, on the outskirts of Havana, commenced to-day [to grind what cane the Insurgents did not burn last week.  SYLVESTER SCOVEL. 


