SPAIN FEARS WORLD.

Madrid Press Tries to Balk a Correspondent in Search of the Truth.

SCOVEL FIERCELY ASSAILED,

Statesmen He Is Expected to See Advised to Give Views with "Patriotic Sentiment.”

CUBAN PRISON AFFAIR RECALLED.

Bitter Reference to Release in Obedience to Demand and "Hard Reclamations."

(Copyright. 1897 by the Press Publishing Company, New York World. Special Cable Dispatch to the World)

 MADRID, Spain. Juno 10.—The Madrid press recognizes In a remarkable way The World's power as a champion of liberty and the Importance of Its triumph In securing the release of Its war correspondent from a Cuban prison.

one of the two loading Government organs. La Epoca, Is trying to prevent the correspondent of The World from ascertaining for the American people whether or not the retained Canovas administration of repression means to carry out the reforms which were promised to Cuba before the crisis, and the influential Anti-American Heraldo Is assisting it. This effort has excited great public Interest, and United States Minister Taylor Is Indirectly Involved.

Here is a literal translation of part of an editorial article In La Epoca:

"By reliable means we have ascertained that in Madrid Is the famous correspondent of The World, of New York. Mister Sylvester Scovel, who always distinguishes himself by hostility to the Spanish cause in Cuba, and by unjust attacks upon our statesmen, as well as the army which fights for the integrity of the fatherland. It is supposed that Scovel means to conduct interviews with the greatest political personages, and although we are certain that, whatever may be their opinions, they would always speak with patriotic sentiment, we think it not unwise to give the antecedents of this Yankee journalist."

This Is from El Heraldo:

“We are certain that our readers have not forgotten the name of the Yankee journalist that was The World’s correspondent In Cuba, and who, coming to Sancti Spiritus on returning from the rebel country, where he had been some time, was captured by our authorities. They will remember also that Scovel, as Is called the Journalist In question, was taken from prison by the demands and hard reclamations of tho United States Government, thus directing the attention of tho Spanish press for some days upon the character and significance of the demand. But as our Government understood the matter In a different manner from the press, It satisfied tho American Government and liberated tho journalist Scovel, who Immediately went to his country. Now, then, Scovel comes to Madrid, and It would not be strange If provided with an affectionate recommendation from Mr. Taylor, he should see Senor Canovas and Senor Castelar to secure from them declarations that would be destined for The World, whose character and significance In the Cuban problem are perfectly well known."

This Is a remarkable admission that “whatever their opinions," Spanish statesmen will "patriotically" state their post-crisis Intentions regarding Cuba. Tho indirect praise of Mr. Taylor’s Americanism is significant.

SYLVESTER SCOVEL.