GEN. BLANCO TO THE WORLD

"I Am Doing My Best," He Says, “to Relieve the Misery in Cuba.”

CABLES TO MADRID URGING REAL HOME RULE.

He Has Twice Cabled to Sagasta in 24 Hours, Asking More Liberty for Cuba.

PEACE NOT POSSIBLE

ANY OTHER WAY.

Bishop of Havana Will Supervise the Distribution of Food, Clothing and Money.

THE OUTLOOK SEEMS HOPEFUL.

(Copyright, 1897, by the Press Publishing Company, New York World.)

(Special Cable Despatch to Tho World.)

HAVANA, Nov. 26.—I was presented to Capt.-Gen. Blanco to-day by General Secretary Congosto.

The • Captain-Geperal la a soldierly looking man, with a white-bearded face expressive of sincerity, and piercing eyes, and Is altogether a good example of a fine commanding officer.

Although my visit was one of courtesy merely, Gen. Blanco took occasion to express a warm desire to alleviate the miseries 'of the reconcentrados. He said that every means in his power was being employed to that end. 

Gen. Blanco admitted that the long-accustomed laxness in the administration of the local authorities, observed by The World's correspondent, was a great obstacle to instant and general relief. “But," he added, “I am going ahead as rapidly as possible."

The Captain-General acknowledges the sympathy that the recent knowledge of the condition of the reconcentrados of Cuba has aroused in the United States.

In answer to an inquiry of Consul-General Lee as to what shape sympathy In the United States would better take, the Captain-General suggested that food, clothing and money be sent to the destitute. He said that such supplies will be cheerfully accepted and distributed by the churchmen of Cuba under the supervision of the Bishop of Havana.

Gen. Blanco thinks that the situation of the reconcentrados is improving daily, and that when local organizations, governmental and private, are completed in all parts of Cuba, the reconcentrados will flourish.

Gen. Blanco received with favor the proffer of an album containing The World’s photographs of starving Cubans.

He seems to be honest and desirous of bringing peace to Cuba. It is simply a question as to what resources Spain >will furnish him.

SYLVESTER SCOVeL.