ALL CUBA AFLAME, SCOVEL SAYS.

The World's Correspondent Sends Another Graphic Despatch from His Cuban Prison, Summing Up the Crisis in the Conflict. 

WHY GOMEZ HAS REJECTED SHAM HOME RULE.

Atrocities Are Committed Every Day Throughout the Island, Scaring Farmers to "the Woods," but Seldom Are Reported. 

AMERICANS IN CUBAN RANKS BRAVE SOLDIERS.

(Copyright, 1897 by the Press Publishing Company, New York World.)

By Special Courier to Havana and by Cable to The World from Key West.

CALABOOSH No. 1 Prison of Sancti Spiritus. SANTA CLARA PROVINCE CUBA, Feb 14. 1897.

    From its beginning the Cuban revolutionary movement has steadily strengthened. It is now universal. 
    From Cape Mayal to Cape San Antoniio the island is invested by armed Cubans.
    Antonio Maceo reached the westernmost point of Cuba one year ago. The revolution had been carried then through the length of the island and the real Cuban-Spanish struggle began in earnest.
    Spain won the admiration of Europe immediately by her magnificent attempt to meet the unexpected emergency of a genuine universal rebellion. She almost exhausted her young manhood and wrung dry her credit.
    Within the year 200,000 brave, disciplined, well-equipped troops have guarded the towns and marched through the fields of Cuba under the driving hand of Spain's most energetic military man, Gen. Valeriano Weyler, yet the revolution has steadily grown in power.
    THe revolutionists have greatly increased in numbers. They are somewhat better organized and very much better armed.
    These statements are conservative and are made only after sixteen months of personal observation in the field. Of this time the last month has been spend with the revolutionists in the provinces of Pinar del Rio, Havana and Santa Clara.
    Patriotism has been, perhaps, the smallest factor in swelling the insurgent ranks. The men who really are actuated by love of liberty took the field long ago.
    Weyler's Barbarity Makes Rebels.
    Hunger and maltreatment have sent almost all of the year's Western recruits to the "manigua," the almost total stoppage of the industries of the island has influenced wage-earners, while harsh governmental proclamations and fear of death have caused the small farmers to seek comparative safety in the bush.
    As foretold in The World at the time of Gen. Weyler's proclamation in Pinar del Rio Province, fully half of the peaceable people there, unwilling to face starvation and plague in the fortified towns, have been forced to the mountains to escape the fate of being "considered as rebels" if caught on their farms. They are now in comparative safety.
    And, as also predicted at the time, these peaceable people in looking out for their own safety are more vigilant than ever. The insurgents of Pinar are far better informed as to Spanish movements than before, and the severity of Gen. Weyler's order has defeated its very intent.
    Havana and Matanzas Provinces are dotted with Spanish columns intelligently guided by native Cuban calvary. Spain's officers show more activity in that section of the island than in any other. Besides the country is comparatively level and open.
    The orders for the concentration of the peaceable people of those two provinces have not been enforced. The farmer on his farm has not been officially declared a rebel, but the guerillas of the many fortified towns and a few of the regular troops have treated him and his fellows as such.
    Atrocities Every Day.
    Atrocities have been committed daily. Usually they are not reported. The farmers in most parts of the island have been frightened and many have sought the protection of the woods and of the revolutionists.
    But here in Santa Clara Province the very large number of men who have lately joined the Cubans in arms seem to have done so chiefly through conviction of the increasing probability of Cuban success. There have been few atrocities here, few Spanish troops. In fact there are many places in the province where, strange as it may seem, the farmers have not yet seen a single soldier of Spain's 200,00.
    In the two Eastern provinces of Puerto Principe and Santiago the revolutionists have been able to recruit openly and at their leisure. 
    Practically the whole population there has moved into the more inaccessible parts. Nowhere else on the island have the Cubans been so impressed with the power of the revolutionary movement.
    The farmers settle lawsuits before prefects of the Republic of Cuba. The young people are married by "Republican" Justices of the Peace and the children attend national schools.
    Patriot Army Numbers 100,000.
    Moderately estimated, there are in the field for Cuba to-day about 100,000 men, about half the total number of males of serviceable age of the agricultural portion of the island.
    Cuba's towns have not yielded anything like this proportion. Not only are the native-born townspeople closely watched, but they have always been surrounded by evidences of Spanish power, by forts and by large garrisons.
    It may be conservatively predicted that unless there is a radical change in Spain's military and civil policy, poverty in the towns, maltreatment on the farms, hunger and no work will bring about over all Cuba in a few months the very thing many Spanish soldiers have sworn to--that they were informed that the only good Cubans live in towns, and that "in the country all are rebels."
    Unless there is a complete reversal of Gen. Weyler's methods--which, by the way, are of precisely that "severity" demanded by the Marquis of Apeztegula, now in Spain begging for Weyler's recall--it will soon be true that in the country in Cuba all are rebels.
    Cuba Cannot be Conquered.
    Spain will have made them so, and the bitter conviction will be forced upon her that the last glimmer of hope is gone, and she cannot crush or wear out a rebellion where "all are rebels," every man a rebel, soldier, every lad a rebel courier, every woman an alert rebel sentinel.
    That is the situation now in [] [] Cuba and seen here the central portion, all the families living at any distance from town are on the [], ready to fly to the nearest "manigua" at the approach of Spanish troops.
    During the last fortnight and often quite near Spanish forces I have slept calmly under hospitable palm-thatched roofs, secre in the [] holder's courteous assurance:
    [] well, sir. We will know when the [] march.
    
[] and jungles in a country where there is no winter cannot be crushed by arms nor by any concession short of the object for which they struggle.
    No matter what considerations have driven them into this war, once in it they must stay in it under the present Spanish policy, and they are likely to stay, no matter what may be Spain's future policy, until they have attained the end for which the war is being waged.
    You can travel through a thicket from one end of Cuba to the other and food grows here almost without cultivation. In short, defensive evasive war is easy in Cuba.
    Better Military Equipment.
    The Cubans can now be said to really possess rifles and cartridges. The guns are divided about as follows:
    Santiago Province, 5,500; Puerto Principe, 10,000; Santa Clara, 7,000; Matanzas, 2,000; Havana, 2,500; Pinar del Rio, 5,000; total, 33,000.
    There should be now about 4,000,000 cartridges, or about 121 for every rifle.
    A year ago the Cuban army of invasion averaged about five cartidges to a soldier, and weapons ranged from fine Mauser rifles down to nawed-off shotguns and brass blunderbusses. These ineffective implements of the chase and the cabinet have all disappeared , to the great loss of curio collectors and the questionable gainof the Spanish authorities, to whom their owners have "presented themselves" under Governmental amnesty.
    Few good guns have gone this road, for rifles are precious things in Cuba, and are given to the best men, who do not often "present themselves."
    Spanish officers here claim that an average of forty insurgents seek Government clemency daily. As most of them are armed only with the machete, which every countryman carries in Cuba almost from the cradle to the grave, and that five men join the rebellion to one who deserts it, this daily loss does not appear serious. 
    However, a radical change in Spain's present policy of severity would result in a large increase in Cuban desertions. 
    Most of the Guns Taken From the Spanish
    Of the Cubans, 33,000 serviceable weapons about 20,000 are of the Remington system, 43-calibre, equally divided between calvary carbines and infantry rifles. Some of these guns were collected from plantations and towns; most of the infantry type were captured from the volunteer garrisons of the western towns that surrendered so easily last winter and the remainder have been sent here since the beginning of the war by the Cuban Junta in New York.
    Filibustering has provided the insurgent petty officers and the generals' escorts with about 5,000 sporting magazine rifles of American make.
    The remaining 7,000 arms are find Mauser rifles. A few of these have come by way of Florida, but the most were captured from the Spanish regular troops. 
    One of these magazine military rifles is in Cuba a "blue badge of courage."
    Audacity of Revolutionists.
    On the Mariel trocha in the last rainy season a regular soldier had the misfortune to fall from the causeway that formed the trocha into that pestilential pool known as the Swamp of Majana. Right under the rifles of the other sentinels some CUbans flashed up the body and politely notified Gen. Arolas that it was at his disposal for burial within the Spanish lines. But they kept the rifle and combs of cartidges. 
    The revolutionists have eight cannon in Puerto Principe, which they captured, together with $12,000 worth of rifles and ammunition and 171 prisoners; when they took the town of Guaimaro and forced the abandonment of Cascorro.
    I have been repeatedly asked here whether the prisoners died by order of Gomez or whether they joined the rebels. They did neither. They fought hard two days, were shelled out of their forts by American-manned artillery, and are now under guard as prisoners of war cultivating vegetables in Puerto Principe.
    Gomez Has a Nitro-Gelatine Cannon.
    Gomez has with him and unsuccessfully used against the town of Arroyo Blanco one of the new nitro-gelatine cannons.
    Early in January one of its complicated projectiles exploded upon leaving the muzzle. The equivalent in nitro-gelatineto eighty pounds of rifle powder "let go" and killed seven of the eight artillerymen and the American gunner. Several inches of the gun disappeared.
    Another Yankee, named Fredericks, trimmed up the ragged muzzle and planted the bobtail weapon opposite Arroyo Blanco. He dug a trench a safe distance away and used a twenty-yard lanyard.
    Gen. Gomez remarked to me:
    "You Americans invented the cannon, but we are testing it."
    I do not know whether Fredericks's proving trench was a life-saver or not, as I left before the trial.
    Gen. Rodriguez has three cannon, and there are three in Pinar del Rio.
    The heaviest metal thrown by any of these guns is a twelve-pound shell. The weight is enough, however, to pierce the average town forts, which were not designed to be artillery proof. 
    One of the principal Cuban objects of this winter's campaign is to attack eastern towns. They are far apart, not heavily garrisoned and usually are easily approached, though through difficult topography.
    To purchase more cannon the Cubans have levied a tax of $200,000.
    Americans in the Field are Brave.
    In all about fifty adventurous Americans have reached the field in Cuba. A good many have never got further than Havana, and a great number from time to time reported on their way or in the field never started. Of the fifty about half became weary and returned to the States, some to become witnesses against Cuban filibusters.
    THe ones still here, whether they have any business in mixing up in the affair or not, are clean examples of nerve and muscle. Almost all are in the artillery. 
    They can do what the Cubans certainly cannot do--keep quiet, under fire. Every one of them has been wounded, some two and three times, and some have been killed.
    Everybody speaks warmly in praise of Osgood, the University of Pennsylvania football player, who was shot dead while sighting his piece from a fort he had just taken at Guaimaro. He was calm under fire, a favorite with all and a Christian. 
    Gomez thinks much of the Yankee artillery, as it is called and wants more of it. 
    Two Tons of Dynamite. 
    Besides rifles and cannon there are two tons of dynamite on the island.
    Compared with their condition a year ago, the CUbans are well armed.
    The 67,000 unarmed men carry the native machete. 
    As the Cuban military policy is to avoid hand-to-hand fighting and as the Cuban "macheteros" could not be got up to a bullet-spitting Spanish square anyhow; these men count for nothing as soldiers. Yet they are an important factor. They can destroy and they keep about 150,000 Spanish troops employed in trying to prevent them from so doing. By the aid of Cuba's deadly summer climate they have killed ten times more SPanish soldiers than have their 33,000 armed brethren.
    The sad admission of the Madrid press shows that last year more thatn 10,000 fresh troops were needed to bring Spain's regiments up to their full strength. I do not believe that 4,000 of the dead and "inutiles" were rendered so by Cuban bullets or Cuban swords. The Cuban climate did it, and the patient Spanish peasant lads had to tramp through the alternating chills, speakings, steamings, and burnings as hard after unarmed as after armed rebels. In many cases their officers marched them a little harder in the first instance.
    Must Fight in Havana and Matanzas.
    The revolutionists have gained less in military organization, discipline and drill than in any other important respect. If this war is to be terminated by force of arms the Cubans must do some fighting in Havana and Matanzas Provinces. 
    Their present plan and from their point of view their best plan, is to prove their control of the island by preventing the operating of every industry that does not acknowledge and pay taxes to the republic of Cuba. Under the conditions of war here they can only show their ability in tax by proving their power to destroy. To do this they must fight.
    The district mentioned forms the vitals of Cuba about the city of Havana its heart, and naturally is the best guarded. Every Cuban cartridge shot against Spain in these provinces is worth fifty suspended elsewhere. Fully realizing this the Cubans have shown a great lack of [].
    As has been noted, there are more insurgents than there were six months ago but they are mostly unorganized.
    Spain has gained ground decidedly in that portion of Cuba between...
the Madrid-Majana trocha and a line running north and south through the middle of Matanzas Province.

Where Weyler Has Gained.
Gen. Weyler knows it and on his way east has passed this territory over as pacified. Of course it is no more pacified than would be any other 8,600 square miles of land containing fully 5,500 armed rebels and 10,000 other disaffected subjects, and Spain must keep up her large expense and army there.
    But from a military point of Gen. Weyler has made large gains. A year ago Spanish forces moved through that section only in heavy, columns of foot, horse, and artillery. Now small squads of guerilla calvary ride where they will. I have seen half a dozen regular soldiers strolling along the Mariano-Guanajay pike-road in the open country. Even the volunteers leave town now and march in the operations. 
    With the exception of two or three parties of two or three hundred members, whose leaders keep them together, the numerous insurgents are practically without organization. They live well, they know the sheep paths and the cow trails and friendly pacificos warn them of the approach of Spanish troops. They simply keep out of the way.
    The Way News Often Gets Into Print.
    Sometimes they get cornered, though this seldom happens. Then the Spanish officer in command writes the usual Spanish official report, a=with its "Enemy completely dispersed," and maybe his guerillas kill a few farmers for "Dead bodies left on the field."
    The Cuban chief, whose men probably have got away safely into the bush, writes a letter to a friend and howling sympathizer in Havana.
    The war correspondent there reads the Spanish officer's report in the Spanish papers, lends an ear to the excitement of the whispering Cuban friends of the chief, then cables or sends by way of Key West, according as his bias may be pro-Spanish or pro-Cuban, an account of a battle in Cuba.
    The insurgent leaders lay the unsatisfactory state of affairs there to the province commanders, one of whom, Gen. Aguirre, now reported dead, never left his own little round of safe hilltops, and let Havana Province take care of itself.
    Indeed, Antonio Maceo crossed the trocha to try to remedy matters.
    Of course there are some daring subordinate leaders as was shown recently by the capture of a lot of Spanish officers between Regla and Guanabacoa, almost in the city of Havana, but the general situation in the limits mentioned is one which should please Captain-General Weyler greatly.
    Maceo's Successor Has Done Well.
    The insurgents are well satisfied with Pinar del Rio west of the trocha and town of Mariel. Naturally Ruis Riviera, Macco's successor, found it a difficult task to keep his small army away from Weyler's masses, and to combat as well the depressing effect of Maceo's death.
    He has done well to merely hold his own, and that he has done so may be clearly seen upon consulting even Spanish official reports. By these it appears that the total Cuban loss in killed, captured and deserters from the time of Gen. Weyler's move against Maceo until now is about 1,000.
    Without applying any discount, this would leave Riviera with 5,000 well-armed men. Six months ago I rode pretty nearly over the whole province and saw all the Cuban forces, except that of Varona in the extreme western end. Maceo then had 6,000 armed men.
    Since then the Cuban Junta has successfully landed several thousand rifles there, and as everywhere else in Cuba there are more men than arms, it is probable that the insurgents in Pinar del Rio have greatly increased in number. However, not having been on the ground, I have estimated the number at the very moderate sum of 5,000.
    Pinar del Rio Not Pacified.
    There are three large bodies of well-disciplined men under the Ducasse-brothers and Riviera. The insurgents are not disorganized nor scattered, so it is not evident that Gen. Weyler's claim that the province is "pacified" is justified by the facts. His own figures do not show it. 
    The topography of Pinar is particularly favorable to the insurgents. An unbroken range of steep, bejungled hills called the "Cordillera" sweeps along the north coast. Thirty thousand men could easily occupy those hills in safety, leaving them only upon raids or after cattle that abound on the grass-grown levels which form the southern two-thirds of the province.
    With these plains covered with divisions of Spanish troops and alive with the movements of hundreds of guerilla calvary bodies, the insurgents must have a hungry time of it in the mountains.
    The hundreds of peaceable families that feared hunger and disease in the towns more than they feared Weyler in the field built palm-tree huts among the low foothills that fringe the Cordillers. Through those hills the Spanish masses have marched.
    As printed by The World, they did not penetrate the actual insurgent camps. The order was to treat every person found "as a rebel."
    
    Melquizo Butchered Pacificos by Order.
    Gen. Melquizo admitted to a World staff correspondent that he killed everybody he met under orders. Insurgent reports are ghastly. One shudders at the thought of what a thorough investigation would reveal. Imagine 30,000 armed men turned loose among about the same number of unarmed men, women, and children, all officially declared to merit the penalty of death without trial.
    Then try and remember that this is the end of the nineteenth century.
    In Cuba east of Matanzas military organization, discipline and drill have greatly improved.
    The island has been divided into two military departments. The eastern department is directly under Calixto Garcia, the western under Maria Rodriguez. Both are under Gomez.
    Rodriguez has taken Maceo's place in the large sense. Ruis Riviera is the chief of Pinar del Rio Province only, while the western department includes that province and extends east, through Havana, Matanzas and Santa Clara Provinces up to the Moron-Jucaro trocha.
    Rodriguez was marching west to co-operate with Antonio Maceo in crossing the trocha when, on Oct. 9, he was badly wounded at the battle of Colorado. He was forced to retire east into the mountains near the south coast, not far from Cienfuegos, and is there now awaiting orders.
    American Proper ties in Danger.
    For some reason Gen. Weyler has passed Rodriguez by on his way east. The Cuban General is now free to move west into the rich Cienguegos sugar district to destroy.
    He has been ordered by Gomez to do so, and in any event would be obliged to do so in obedience to the general orders of Jan. 21, which require the burning of the cane of all estates that grind or prepare to grind.
    Several of the largest sugar properties extant are there and are grinding. Some of the most valuable are owned or controlled by Americans.
    Gen. Rodriguez's men are the best soldiers I have yet seen in Cuba. One great improvement is the increased proportion of infantry.
    The Cubans' 33,000 armed men are now about one-half dismounted to the great benefit of their effectiveness. As calvary they very seldom have done any damage with their swords, while the spectacle of a lot of men wildly banging away from plunging horses at a dim line of Spanish troops 1,000 yards distant has heretofore been the usual queer one. Rodriguez remarks: "Now we can use the stone walls as well as the Spaniards."
    His infantry is mae up of sturdy men, well disciplined and fairly drilled. I saw them in review at La Celba, near Manicaragua on Jan 24.
    The calvary also appears more steady. Rodriguez is trying to knock into their unwilling heads the rudiments of fighting on foot, with horses to the rear.
    Cubas Calvarymen [] in His Horse
    The average Cuban calvaryman hates to do anything on foot as much as does his North American prototype, the cowboy. He simply sits on top of his horse until it drops from fatigue or a bullet. Uphill or downhill, over any kind of ground, the Cuban sticks astride until the horse dies.
    At the beginning of the war there were enough food horses in Cuba to last five years of decently conducted daily marching. But lack of common sense has killed off most of them, really to the great profit of the Cuban rebellion.
    The Cuban infantry can march just about as fast as the Cuban cavalry ever did on their worn-out mounts and can shoot fifty tiems better from behind good protection.
    Gomez's army Greatly Improved.
    Gomez has greatly improved his immediate command. Camp is struck and pitched rapidly and systematically. On the march struggling has almost ceased and when encamped bugle calls order daily routine.
    In fact east of Matanzas [] you please [] have about disappeared and the insurgents are beginning to be soldiers.
    Garcia is said to have made the greatest strides forward in these respects. He naturally could for for in his territory the CUbans have always had to march to find Spanish columns and [].
    In general however, the insurgent organization is rudimentary [] points [] their clothes. They will [] off a [] [] from the barrels of the splendid Mauser infantry rifles because they [] them easier to carry. They still kill five times more [] a day than they [] and they obey in a meditative manner.
    The subordinate officers are inclined still in []...
[]ceiving an order, and many of the higher chiefs do not seem to care much anyhow. 
Dodging Tactics of the Cubans.
    The Cuban policy is not to fight. They are winning this war by running away. On the approach of a Spanish column, always known well in advance, the Cuban leader, unless he has tremendous topographical odds, usually sends a small body of men to impede the Spanish advance, while the bulk of the Cubans strike camp, flank the enemy by a short semicircle, and very often pitch camp in the original place half an hour after the Spanish rear guard has left and the Spanish commander has written his official report of the "capture of a rebel camp."
    Still, the small compact squadrons would do better work could they shoot straighter, and Spain could be made to tire of this war much more quickly were there more really general engagements. 
    Plenty of Good for a Year at Least.
    There is plenty of food all over the island to feed the insurgents for at least another year. East of the Moron trocha the Cubans are cultivating their own supplies. They any that when they get their new artillery they will be enabled to capture enough farm-hands to do it for them.
    In Central Cuba cattle are abundant.
    In Havana and Matanzas the insurgents are liberally supplied by the farmers yet at work.
    In Pinar del Rio, I am informed, the many pacificos that have taken to the hills are raising enough food for all.
    To understand how it is possible for a little island about the size of Ohio to offer abundant food after the practical stopping of work for two years of destruction by 300,000 men one must see the land. Take up a handful of brown Cuban soil and its warm richness seems instinct with life. Things grow luxuriantly almost without cultivation. Many kinds of nourishing, palatable food grow wild.
    The Cubans have always lived high without really working, and the climate that has fed them has evervated the race. If it were not so, with their great natural advantages and intense love of freedom, the Cubans would have shaken off the Spanish yoke fifty or seventy-five years ago.
    Enthusiasm and Confidence Universal. 
    From Pinar del Rio clear to Santiago the revolutionists are enthusiastic. Even in the northwest corner of Havana Province, the hottest place in Cuba for the Cubans, they are confident of ultimate success. THey regard Spain's change of front and offer of reforms as a confession of weakness, and from the soldiers' servants to the generals they are united in their faith.
    The refusing of any termination of the war short of absolute freedom already sent to The World by the President and the General-in-Chief of the Separatists is really the opinion of all the Cubans in arms.
    Most large Cuban property owners, many of whom have liberally aided the revolution by secret donations, wish the acceptance of reforms which really are autonomy. All American property owners wish it, next to annexation, which is impossible.
    But the men in the field feel their power. They will not accept less than the liberty for which they are struggling. 
    And from the actual condition of affairs in the field it looks as if they will obtain it.
    SYLVESTER SCOVEL.
