 THE MOST IMPORTANT DOCUMENT IN THE CUBAN WAR.
President Cisneros and Maximo Gomez, General-in-Chief of the Insurgents, Join in a Letter to the Director of The World, Declaring that the Cubans Are Now Ready to Purchase Absolute Freedom from Spain, and that the War Cannot Be Ended on Any Other Terms—The Letter Sent by Sylvester Scovel, World War Correspondent, Through Official Channels, with Comments.

[DRAWINGS OF MAXIMO GOMEZ, CARLOS ROLOFF, SALVADOR CISNEROs, Rafael Portuondo, Santiago Garcia Canizares, Severo Pina]




TWO The World from the Cuban President am General-in-Chief, both Approved by the Cabinet of the Provisional Government, Making Suggestions of Supreme Importance both to Spain and the United States—Friendly Intervention of This Government Definitely Invited	as an Arbiter in the War.

(Copyright, 1898, by the press Publishing Company, New York World)
Headquarters Gen. Maximo Gomez, Dagamal, near Arroyo Blanco, Province of Santa Clara, Jan. 27, 1897)

The Cubans In arms feel that they have accomplished too much, jittered too much and been deceived too much in their relations with Spain, past and present, to negotiate for peace on any other basis than absolute freedom.

They will not consider autonomy in any form or under any guarantee, no matter how secure it may be. Through their President, as well as the commander-in-chief of their army, they have categorically so stated in answer to The World's questions.

The document in Spanish which accompanies this letter was adopted in full Cabinet session, addressed to the proprietor and editor of The World, jointly signed by the President of Cuba's Provisional Government and her general-in-chief, and sealed with the seal of the infant republic. The document is as follows.

[TRANSLATION	Of THE SECOND LETTER.]

Mr. Pulitzer, Director of the New York World:

At the request of your correspondent we have the greatest pleasure in answering the following question:
Would you accept, for Cuba, autonomy even if the United States guaranteed it?” In no form whatever. We cannot accept autonomy nor any other settlement of the present war which presupposes in the least the continuance of the sovereignty of Spain in the island of Cuba.

Our firm, decided conviction is that Spain is unable to rule in Cuba and that the island can never enjoy, a quiet and civilized
life under the dominion of Spain, no matter what form such authority way take.

Our ideals and the aspirations of all the Cubans have always, been, and are now the absolute independence of the island of Cuba.

We long to see Cuba a democratic Republic. To realize that ideal the Cubans look up arms in 1868 and 1875 and will takethem up a hundred times more if necessary.

[TRANSLATION.]	

(Copyright, 1887, by the Press Publishing Company, The New York World.)
	
To Mr.	Pulitzer,Director of The New York World:

At the request of your correspondent we have the greatest pleasure in answering the following question:

“Do you believe that the war can be ended on the basis of Cuban Independence, with the condition that Cuba pays to Spain an indemnity, with the United States acting as arbiter?”

On the basis of Independence we believe it is possible to enter into negotiations. They should provide for the terms of evacuation of the island by the Spaniards and future relations between the government of Spain and the new Cuban Republic.

We believe there should also be included an indemnity to be paid to Spain by Cuba, provided the amount is reasonable.
That would be honorable, practical and good for all. But. if done it should be done as quickly as possible. The indemnity should spare the further loss of blood and money, and if agreed to promptly it would save the ruin of a country whose people have sworn to destroy it rather than yield again to the authority of Spain.

Each day that passes brings fresh hatreds and renewed devastations. Each day lessens the power of production of the country.
Cuba can pay less as time passes, not only because she will owe less to Spain, but because it will be increasingly difficult for her to fulfill the agreements she is now able to make.

The indemnity to Spain could be either in the form of an acknowledgment or guarantee by Cuba of a part of the debt already contracted by Spain or the payment to Spain of a certain sum in bonds or money.

We should not oppose any objection if the United States choose to intervene as arbiter, officially or semiofficially as the friend of both sides, provided always that the island of Cuba shall not sacrifice thereby her own sovereignty.	
With the greatest consideration, we are, yours,
SALVADOR CISNEROS y B. 
M. GOMEZ

El Dagamal (Sancti Spiritus), January 27, 1897.


Until this end is accomplished neither peace nor prosperity can exist undisturbed in the Island of Cuba,
To end all doubts we wrote Article 11 of our Constitution, declaring that “the treaty of peace with Spain must necessarily have for its basis the absolute independence of the Island of Cuba.” We are, with the greatest consideration, yours, 
SALVADOR CISNEROS y B.
M. GOMEZ
El Dagamal (Sancti Spiritus), Jan, 27, 1897.

(Sealed with the Seal of the Republic.)

This document represents the wish o all the revolutionists. Since Jan. 2 I have been in the field with the Insurgent armies in the three provinces of Pinar del Rio (east of the trocha), Havana and Santa Clara. I have interviewed all the principal leaders and have talked familiarly with the rank and file of the rebel army. All are in accord with article No. 11 of their Constitution.

SPAIN S ONLY WAY OUT

Now is offered to the Government of the United States a really practicable means of friendly intervention in the interests of both
parties.	

If Spain can be persuaded to accept a liberal number of millions, her depleted treasury may be filled and her credit amended at the sole expense of quitting her banner from an island already conservatively known to be lost to her dominion. On their part,the Cubans will yield to Spain not much more than the value of .  Cuban property which will otherwise certainly be destroyed should the war continue.


Cubans Willing to Pay an Indemnity of Millions to Spain if Granted Absolute Freedom Before the Island Is Ruined—Mr. Scovel Hints that 
They Might Go So far as to Allow the United States to Administer the Finances of the Island Until the Indemnity Is Paid—$100,000,000— Not Too Much.


UNITED STATES MAY HELP

They can afford to pay a very large amount, and I am in a position to state that they will do so. Cuba will accept any peaceable means laid down by the United States that will secure their independence. Last year Gen. Gomez authorized the statement that in his opinion the Cubans would even go so far as to allow the United States to administer the finances of the island until such time as any loan secured from or in that country should be repaid.

There is no reason to believe that the revolutionaries would not agree to the same thing now, and if so it would require but a very short time comparatively for this wonderfully rich country to pay an extraordinarily large indemnity to Spain, at a burden per capita and upon capital no larger than was carried here immediately before the war.

CUBA COULD SURELY PAY ONE HUNDRED MILLION DOLLARS.

To Spain and to Spanish officials Cuba has been paying for years fully fifty millions of dollars annually. This statement is a moderate one and can be proved.

This amount should be sufficient to pay interest and principal upon a loan of comparatively short tenure and of size sufficient to compensate Spain in the full for her voluntary evacuation of the island of Cuba.

For the property owners of the country the purchase proposition is next best to guaranteed autonomy. The amount of money they will have to pay will be larger, as the total amount paid to Spain will be larger, but their sole and certain alternative in the event of the continuance of the war la the total destruction , of their interests by both contending parties.	
	
PURCHASE THE ONLY SOLUTION.

In short, the refusal of autonomy by the revolutionists, the impossibility of forcing it upon them, the fact that neither Spain  nor Cuba can terminate the struggle by force of arms, and the fact that this war is a war on property to its complete destruction all point to purchase as being the only feasible way of bringing peace. At present not more than one-fourth of the interests of the island
e way of been destroyed. Enough producing power remains to purchase its own salvation.

UNITED STATES NOW INVITED TO ACT AS ARBITER.

The Government of tho United States is now officially empowered to set at arbitrator in the matter. If it does this at once and persuades Spain to enter into negotiations, a truce may be declared, official representatives of Spain, Cuba and the United States may meet, and the whole matter be amicably arranged. Spain will be amply indemnified for the abdication of her sovereignty here, and will save thousands of her brave peasant boys from death by exposure, pestilence and bullets.

Cuba will save the bulk of her interests intact and will be free, while the Government of the United States will have the credit of terminating a strife destructive to its own interests, and if continued involving the total destruction of a rich country and threatening the dissolution of an impoverished but proud nation.

CUBANS WILLING TO BUY FREEDOM.

On the basis of Independence, that is of true independence, the Cuban revolutionists are disposed to make great sacrifices to secure peace. They refuse autonomy, but they universally favor the purchase of their Independence. A year ago Spain would consider no solution of the war save Spanish victory by force of arms.

It is true that Martinez Campos declared that the Cubans could never be subdued by this means. But the general sentiment of the Spanish Court and Government, public, and press, was: "Finish the war by means of war."

At that time the Cubans, through their General-in-Chief, and by means of The World, expressed their willingness to purchase independence.

To-day Spain no longer hopes to end the war by making war and has proffered autonomy.

The Cubans, refusing this, are still willing to purchase their freedom.

They now renew, through The World, their former offer, although their position has strengthened in the past year and Spain’s dominion has weakened.

ALL CUBANS AGREED.

The Journals of Spain, and even of Cuba, have lately been full of rumors of reforms and concessions on the part of Spain.

Prominent reformists and autonomists have been ennobled by the Queen. Everything has pointed to Spain's willingness to negotiate for peace. The insurgents were therefore fully prepared to receive the definite information, which The World was the first to give them, that Minister Dupuy de Lome had informed Secretary Olney of Spain's willingness to grant autonomy to Cuba and to guarantee the name to the Cubans by treaty with the United States, who would act at friendly arbitrator.

CUBANS TEMPTED, BUT THEY REFUSED.

The proposition was a tempting one to the Cubans in arms. These are the most peaceable people in the world and the laziest. They are the most charming companions and the worst natural soldiers.

They have worried out two years of uphill war against the most tremendous odds under which any colonial war in history has been fought, and they most earnestly desire peace.

The unofficial nut none the less real offer of the United States, “the Great Pacificator,” to secure to them the right to enact they own laws levy their own taxes, and dismiss to Spain any Viceroy they might not be satisfied with constituted a degree of genuine freedom greater than they had ever dreamed would be conceded by Spain.

The temptation to accept was enormous.
Their refusal is concise, positive and final.
It means that the Cubans feel their power.

SYLVESTER SCOVEL.













