Truth Hurts the Dons
No Wonder, Then, that they Revile The World’s Correspondent in Cuba.

A REBUKE FOR ONE OF THEM.

Expulsion, Says Editor San Migue, Might Prove a Powerful Two-Edged Sword.

{Copyright, 1893, by the Press Publishing Company. New York World.)
(Special from a Staff Correspondent of The World.)

HAVANA. Jan. 28.—If Havana newspaper editors and the people they seek to please had the opinion of their Minister, Moret, that “the truth is not always agreeable, but it is very necessary,” all unsubsidized American and English newspaper correspondents would not have been so continually vilified in print. But public opinion has changed sufficiently in this “beginning of the end” of the Cuban war for one advanced editor to enter a protest.
    Mr. San Miguel owns the most important daily of Havana. He prints the following unsolicited bit of common sense:
    “K. Sendas, in his despatches of today in El Diarlo de la Marina, opines that Scovel and other representatives of the American press ought to be expelled from Cuba as pernicious strangers. The
well-known K. Sendas has got himself into a bad path. This asking for expulsions is apt to convert itself into a powerful sword with two edges, which assuredly will only wound those who handle it. Does it not seem so to you?”
    The World’s despatches from Cuba have sometimes been maliciously mistranslated and much twisted and reprinted by Spanish papers here. In such cases printed rectification has always been personally demanded, and always and with much trouble secured.
    They luckily have an idea down here that American correspondents all come from Texas and carry six-shooters, with which they can drive tacks and do other ballistic “stunts.”
    The Spanish shopkeepers’ journal, El Commerclo, said in a quarter column article about an audacious proposition to Interview Gen. Blanco, and after a citation of numerous expulsions and reasons for another one, that “the correspondent of The World has certainly not distinguished himself by his friendship or Spain, and therefore it is not proper that he should remained among the Spaniards, and very much less that he should visit our authorities." 
    Fortunately, Gen. Blanco was persuaded to think differently. 
    The best known New York Correspondent of the next to the largests and most influential Havana daily thus characterizes The World's first exposure of the awful results of Weylerism.
    "The World prints to-day a sizzling despatch from Scovel painting the situation as horrible, and accusing officials of falsifying the reports (number of dead recorded.) Transparent intention to aid the laborantes (rebel sympathizers)."
    And yesterday the same paper clamored for the expulsion of "Scoval, Paper & Co," because the one had said that autonomy was dead and the other that it was dying. It’s rather hard on Scovel, as he holds and has frequently written an opinion that autonomy- real autonomy, if you please - is the natural and only road to complete Cuban independence — “unprotected” independence; and he furthermore risked hanging to tell that same thing to Maximo Gomez.
    It is useless to quote further. All the things are more or less alike, and the most bitter ones are clear proofs that the truth has been told and the quick touched.
    Only the leading, papers have been quoted, but the hundred or more small weeklies and the many party organs of Havana go them twenty better. United they make a big noise, separately the howling voice of each is as the faint yap of a sick pup.
    It is hard enough to get at the truth in Havana. If you don't see a thing you have to let both sides lie to you and then guess at the truth. And when one considers that upon this cardinal impossibility is added every class of obstruction possible to an ignorant, prejudiced and cunning people under the sway of an immoral and undignified press, and when you Know that when one does get a bit of the truth that doesn’t happen to favor Spain he can't send it, except as this scrawl goes, by expensive smuggling, then you may appreciate what it is to be an American correspondent, in Havana and do conscientious, not even to say reliable, work.	
S. S.