DE LOME DID WRITE THAT LETTER, AND HAS RESIGNED AS SPANISH MINISTER

WASHINGTON, Feb. 9.-- Enrique Dupuy de Lome must go. IF the Spanish Government does not recall him immediately this Government will dismiss him.
The original of the outrageous letter written by the SPanish Minister to Editor Canalejas, of the Madrid Heraldo, was placed before President McKinley this afternoon.
    Attourney Horatio L. Reubens, of the Cuban Junts, called at the State Department about 2 P.M and announced that the letter was in his possession. Already, acting upon what had been printed in the newspapers, a request for an explanation had been sent from the State Department to Minister de Lome.
    Assistant secretary Day accompanied Attorney Rubens to the White House, and the original letter, together with specimens of Senor de Lome's handwriting, were given to President McKinley. 
    Not having heard from the Minister, Assistant Secretary Day took the original latter and went to the Spanish Legation. thus missing the communication from De Lome then on the way to the State Department by messenger. Judge Day handed the ltter to Senor de Lome and asked him if it was genuine. Senor de Lome admitted its authenticity and offered no apology for having written it.
    Acting under instructions from the President, a cablegram to Gen. Woodford, the United States Minister was quickly prepared.
    Minister's Recall Demanded
    Minister Woodford was instructed to notify the Spanish Government that unless he was enabled to inform the State Department at Washington before 12 o'clock to-night that Senor de Lome had been recalled the Secretary of State would send his passports to the Spanish Minister at the beginning of office hours to-morrow.
This simplifies the situation and gives President McKinley the prestige of having acted with the utmost promptness. It is even questioned by some whether a reasonable time was allowed Minister Woodford in which to perform his delicate errand. The cablegram of instructions could not reach him beofre 8 o'clock to-night, and this would afford him but a small margin upon which to work. 
    The publication of De Lome's letter was not a revelation to the state department. For five days the officials there have known that such a communication was said to be in existence.
    Early to-day Assistant Secretaries Day and Adee carefully compared specimens of De Lome's handwriting with photographs of the fac similie letter promulgated by Junta. The similarity was convincing. 
    Judge Day then went to the White House and conferred with the President for more than an hour. It was determined then that the customary formal steps should be taken to ascertain the Spanish Minister's guilt or innocence.
    Assistant Secretary Adee, whose three decades of service in the department make him an authority on diplomatic matters prepared a note requesting Senor de Lome to call at the State Department or give in writing such explanation as he considered proper. 
    It was while awaiting a reply that the original letter was taken to the State Department.
    Judge Day afterward gave out the following statement:
    "Minister de Lome does not deny the letter. This department has communicated with Gen. Woodford on the subject. Until that reaches the Spanish Government it would not be proper to more fully state the contends of the message to Minister Woodford. 
    De Lome's lapse has been the engrossing theme of conversation throughout Washington to-day. The great preponderance of sentiment was that the Minister would be asked first for an explanation and then to leave the country. The opinion was almost unanimous that his ervice here is ended. The authenticity of the letter 

The authenticity of the letter was not doubted. Occasionally the view was expressed that the letter was private and could not be made the basis of an official inquiry by the Government. In that respect the case of De Loma is unlike that of Sackville-West.
    Minister de Lome seemed to lose his head when he learned that his indiscreet letter, in which he called President McKinley "a low politician weak and catering to the rabble," had attained publicity. He refused to see anybody seeking information. A few personal friends who saw him reported that he was greatly excited, realizing that his diplomatic career was finished. 

WANTED HIM DISGRACED,
Administration Sorry It Did Not Dismiss De Lome Before He Could Resign.
WASHINGTON, Feb 10.--Senor De Lome received late to-day a despatch from his Government, relieving him of his Ministerial duties here. The despatch was brief. It simply stated that his various cablegrams had been recieved, instructed him to report at his earliest convenience in Madrid and designated Senor Du Bosc as Charge d'Affaires.
    The blinds of the De Lome residence have been tightly closed all day. Preparations are being hastened for departure, but the ex-Minister will be unable to leave for several days. He expects to sell some of his effects by public auction.
    It had been anticipated here that Senor De Lome would tender his resignation to escape leaving in disgrace and the State Department officials had consulted in regard to this contingency. It was decided yesterday that Spain should be requested to recall De Lome or be given the alternative of his dismissal. 
    When Judge Day retired at midnight last night it was firmly believed that if Spain refused to recall the Minister, he could be given his passports this morning.
    To-day cablegrams from Madrid announced that De Lome's resignation had been offered and accepted. A hurried despatch was sent to Gen. Woodford instructing him to insist upon a recall. Woodford confirmed the previous despatches stating that the resignation had been accepted. 
    Then the Administration officials realized the position in which they were placed by not sending De Lome his passports before he had an opportunity to cable his resignation.
    Throughout yesterday and to-day the officials believed everything was in their own hands. The passports were written and ready to be sent at a minute's notice.
    The Question of Passports
    Subsequently a question arose as to whether passports could with propriety be sent to a man here only as a private citizen. The officials of the State Department were thoroughly aroused. They had determined that De Lome should leave in disgrace. The acceptance of his resignation, they felt, would be in the nature of Spain condoning his offense. Similar permission on their part would place this Government in a similar attitude. 
    The President refrained from taking any part in this discussion. He felt that as an interested party to the controversy he should leave the settlement of the whole matter entirely to the State department. 
    The officials in deciding to follow the precedent established in the case of Lord Sackville-West overlooked the fact that he did not resign, but was given his passports at the instance of his own Government. It De Lome's passports should be sent him after he ceased to formally represent the Spanish Government it would bring forward a new precedent. This condition puzzled the officials. 
    One ceremony usual at such times will be omitted when Senor Du Bosc performs his first official duties with this Government. Precedent orders that the retiring minister should introduce the Charge d'Affaires to the President and Secretary of the State. Senor De Lome will never again be permitted to enter the State Department of the White House. An intimation was conveyed to Mr. Du Bosc that the customary ceremony would be omitted in his case and that the department would take notice of the despatch from Madrid and recognize him without formal introduction. 
    Friends in the Diplomatic Corps fear that Senor de Lome's health will be affected by his hasty removal. Some weeks ago, when a question cam up which cause the Minister considerable anxiety, he did not sleep during the entire night, but walked the floor until morning. HIs masseur was sent for and it was some hours before his nerves were calmed, and he was unable to transact business for several days. 
    GUARDING OUR MINISTER
    
BLANCO RETURNS TO HAVANA FOILED
He Is Worse Off than Campos Was After His Defeat by Gen. Maceo
NOT A CUBAN CHIEF BRIBED.
Famine Continues, Autonomy Fails, Rebels Active, Madrid Growls, Havana Protests
HAVANA, Cuba, by way of Key West, Fla.,  Feb. 10.--With starvation continuing, autonomy failing, the rebels awakening, Madrid complaining, Havana protesting, and his very subordinate prophesaying failure, Blanco returns worse off than Campos was after the Battle at Coliseo. 
    The entering wedge of American-food-for-Cubans-and-American-ships-in-Cuban-Harbors intensifies the hopelessness of the situation for Spain.
    "Autonomy without an American protectorate is worthless," said a member of the Autonomical Cabinet to me privately. "American Intervention is our only hope."
    This is a momentous admission. But autonomy really has become a laughing stock with the public. A good-for-nothing bull in the bull-ring on Sunday was hissed because, as a newspaper explained the next day, he "didn't appreciate his autonomy of action."
    That incident, trifling as it may [] gives the key-note of popular [] regarding Sagasta's new policy toward Cuba. 
    Gen. Blanco's return without having bought up rebel chiefs of importance is a staggering blow to autonomy. The object of his tour of the island was universally known. He was deceived. His emissaries probably have not even seen Rabl or Rios, the two Eastern leaders he thought he could purchase.
   
It only needed Pando's drastic action in gagging the press to almost annihilate Autonomist hope. He summoned all the editors to him yesterday and threatened to seize any paper which printed even "between the linems" an criticism of autonomy of the military campaign or of the alleged cordial relations between Spain and the United States.
The Havana press always was []; now it is completely gagged. It is in a worse state than it was under Weyler, who did permit some policial discussion. But no the government censor is given the powers of a czar and a mind reader combined. 
    Censorship of foreign correspondents despatches continues under the military section.It is impossible to cable news if it is not distinctly favorable to Spain.
    The Diario de la Marina continues to labor for the expulsion of unsubsidized American correspondents, again using The World correspondent as an example. The truth about Aranguren's death [] resents bitterly. 
    The autonomical ministers were visited officially by the French Admiral and they will give him a state dinner. Political circles attach a great significance to the failture of Capt. Sigsbee of The Maine, and Gen. Lee to salute the new Governement of Cuba. Gen Lee says the naval regulations were followed and the representative of the "highest authority" over Cuba was [] visted. De Lome probably protested as Capt. Converse, of the Montgomery on arriving at Matansas visited everybody, from the collector of the port up to the civil and military governors. He received voluminous instructions from Washington. 
    The insurgents apparently are cheered by Gen.Blanco's failure to bribe their leaders and his cool reception during the tour. 
    Spanish official reports indicate comparatively severe engagements in Eastern Cuba. A fight near Holguin [] is said by Cubans to have resulted in a Spanish loss of nearly one hundred.
    There was a lively fight yesterday on the outskirts of Matansas. Very few insurgents are supposed to occupy that province. 
    Sugar-cane burning is more extensive than it was last year.
    Unless Congress speedily makes another appropriation the destitute American citizens in Cuba will starve. Gen. Lee has less than $10,000 left of the [] appropriated. The balance has been spent even too economically.
    The destitute people were absolutely without food in Sagua for two weeks. In Matanzas there was no Consular issue for three weeks. In this city there was no issue for January. the United States official in charge authorizes this statement. The officials...
   [Cartoon]
The officals drew as long as they could upon their own resources. Gen. Lee expects his present supply of money to last about three weeks.
Starvation goes on the same as ever in all the cities of Cuba except Havana where American charity has mad a great improvement and Gen. Lee;s orphan hospital for reconcentrade babied will soon take pitiful sights from the streets. Th city government also is doing much more than formerly. 
    This week some American supplies were sent to several smaller towns, but they are only a drop to an ocean
    The volunteers who do the distributing are honest and faithful, but they have their friends. A first-class officer of the United States Commissary Department should be sent here. Gen Lee would be glad to have this responsibility lifted from his shoulders. He has neither the time nor the assistance necessary to thouroughly organize and maintain the increasing difficult work. Already the Spanish papers are criticising the manner of distribution. 
    Miss Clara Barton and Mr. Elwell may undertake the task, but it is probable they will have to ask trained []. However, the food and clothing of American charity are saving thousands of lives and the hunger plague of Havana, at least, has lost much of its bitterness.
    SYLVESTER SCOVEL.
