
THE RIOTS IN HAVANA MEAN REVOLUTION. [Revolution is in bold and in a larger font.]

    Americans Not Yet Attacked, but Our Naval Fleet 
    May Be Ordered to Cuba at 
    Any Hour.
    
    CLEAR EXPLANATION OF THE NEW CRISIS BY THE WORLD STAFF CORRESPONDENTS.

KEY WEST, Fla., Jan. 12— The battle-ship Maine has been ordered to sea immediately.
It is understood here that she is going to Havana. In consequence of the riots there to-day and the fear that American interests,
perhaps even the lives of Americans in that city, would be in danger If the mobs should got beyond control.
    As previous despatches to The World have indicated, the Havana mob is more to be feared by Americans there than anything else.
The battleship Maine will be accompanied, it is reported, by two torpedo-boats.
It is expected that they will start early to-morrow morning, and will be in Havana a few hours later.

    HAVANA. Jan. 13.—The mobs have been cowed by Gen. Blanco’s troops and the city is outwardly calm to-night
    But trouble may begin again any moment and be extremely serious.
    A turbulent crowd gathered to-day noon in front of the Diario de la
Marina office, shouting, “Down with the Diario!" and threatening an attack, 
but Gen. Arolas dispersed it quickly with a force of regulars.
    The riot of last night was directed against Blanco's policy of 
moderation rather than against Americans. The Spanish irreconcilables have 
an undying hatred of anything smacking of autonomy for Cuba, and cling to Weyler’s policy of “Exterminate the-Cuban breed.”
    United States Consul-General Lee walked freely about in Central Park last night during the rioting, 
attended to his official business to-day as usual and dined this evening at the Hotel Inglaterra, as is his custom.
    He has not asked that a United States warship be sent here. But he knows that a squadron of fighting vessels Is waiting with steam up at Key West, only six hours' sail distant, for the word from him to dash into Havana Harbor if Americans should be in peril here.
    
    MADRID. Jan. IX—Private despatches from Havana, received here to-day assert that shouts of "Viva Don Carlos!" and "Viva Weyler!" have been raised under the very windows of Gen. Blanco.

    ANNEXATION NOT AUTONOMY. 
   

The riot in Havana was simply annexation against autonomy. It had 
absolutely no anti-American significance.
 	It was a protest, of the pro-Spaniards of Cuba against the new policy of moderation of Spain. A careful confidential canvass lately of the most
important Spanish men of wealth in Havana disclosed the fact that they do not
want autonomy. To each I put the question:
    "Which would you prefer—real Cuban autonomy, or annexation to the United States?”
    Two-thirds answered quickly, “Annexation.” And so did all the others 
when discussion developed the fact that real autonomy would bo a rebel 
victory, and that therefore really home-rule Cuba would be ruled by its Cuban victors.
	The Spanish property-owners of Cuba would rather be ruled even by the United  States than by their traditional enemies, whose hatred and wish for vengeance have been embittered by the cruelties of Weyler and by the  inability of the present Government to remedy the wrong.
     
                     CALL THEM REBEL ORGANS.

	These loyal Spaniards hate autonomy. They look upon the new 
autoatomical newspapers, La Discussion and El Reconcentrado, as rebel organs.
And it was the offices of these newspapers against which the riot was 
directed. Americans were not menaced or insulted. The once powerful Diario
Diario, and once ultra-Spanish Diarlo de la Marina, are hated by all Spanish officers.
    They know that Weyler and his policy of annihilation would have crushed the Cuban war by June. And all these papers have violently attacked him and through him the army.

    VOLUNTEERS QUIET SO FAR.

	The volunteers have not yet taken part in the Spanish anti-autonomical demonstrations. When the volunteers do riot, probably about the time 
auto-nomical elections are to be attempted, when they  will vote as an armed 
political party, then Americans will be in great danger.
    First, because the average volunteer has been trained to believe Americans to be only “fat pigs” for Spanish bayonets to stick into.
    Second, because the volunteer officers want the war ended, want United States Intervention, want at least an American protectorate, and see the best way to get all three is to kill a few American citizens in Havana.
    Of three expected and provided-for outbreaks only two have occurred. One was Christmas eve; the other Wednesday night.
    Both were engineered by Spanish officers and ultra-Spanish politicians simply
as demonstrations to show Spain that the Cuban Spaniards would not 
tolerate autonomy or Blanco.
    Neither riot menaced Americans.

	PERILS OF AMERICANS.

    But when the volunteers act no citizen of the United States will be safe.
    This may be expected when, by demonstrations in Havana and refusal in
the fields of Cuba, autonomy proves itself a thing only on paper—a mere affair of one ministerial proclamation in Madrid, with a pretty council chamber and five handsome secretarial inkstands in Havana.
    Gen. Lee is watching the volunteers. I am In a position to state that when they are about to move—and the United States Consul-General will know it— he will ask for United States warships—and he will get them, and McKinley has privately said:
    “We are satisfied with Gen. Lee, and we hope he is satisfied with the cordial 
support we are giving and will give him when a crisis arrives.

		SYLVESTER SCOVEL