
CONGOSTO'S THREAT OF LEE'S RECALL.

He Inquired if the Consul-General Was in Favor of Autonomy.
WAS A BREACH OF ETIQUETTE.
Lee Smiled and Offered to Sign a Petition for His Withdrawal Himself.

(Copyright, 1898, by the Press Publishing Company, New York World.)
(Special from a World Staff Correspondent, Sent from Havana to Key West, by The World's Despatch Steamer.)

On Board The World's 
Express Steamer Confidence.
Havana Harbor, March 8.

I am fortunately able to definitely state the exact position of Gen. Lee in respect to real Spanish attacks upon his official conduct and alleged Spanish demands for his recall. Lee knows nothing officially about the demand for his recall. What he gathers from the scanty and often contradictory cable notices in the local press constitutes his sole information on that subject.
	Not a word has been received from the State Department on the subject up to the present hour.
 And Lee considers an actual Spanish official demand for his nation, as even the cable notices here make Sagasta deny having sent such a message. Local papers also quote McKinley as being satisfied with Gen. Lee as indeed he must be if he has not changed from the original opinion he expressed to me last year.
	We are well satisfied with Gen. Lee and we hope he will be satisfied with the support this Administration will always give him."	
	As would any experienced military man whose duty it is to fully inform his Government, Gen. Lee has noted
some things decidedly not favorable to Spain's course of war and has sometimes thus informed the State Department. This has been particularly so regarding Spain's offer of alleged autonomy, which now even its own originators regard as a farce and so state.
	Lee's views on this question were only confidentially expressed to the State Department, yet somehow they leaked to the Havana Government's ears. The Spanish Legation at Washington had been doing good work, and the reult was absolutely the only official exchange of correspondence between Gen. Lee and the palace as to the American Consul-General's views and their bearing upon his official acceptability to Spain.
	Congosto Questions Lee.
	About six weeks ago Congosto, either through the source mentioned or from the American newspapers quoting an alleged report of Lee to the Department, saw fit to write a note to Lee wishing to know if it was true that Lee's views did not prognosticate a glowing victory for the extensive autonomy reforms lately in process of emplantation in Cuba.
	In itself this query was a grave breach of diplomatic etiquette. A government official's reports to his superiors are supposed to be sacred. However, Congosto seemed to think that had Lee such ideas, especially that the present autonomic government is not desired by either Spaniards or Cubans, and that not fitting the wishes of any  element it can hardly ever become adopted by all, his position in the eyes of Spain would be decidedly "persona non grata."
	He plainly threatened Lee with a Spanish demand for his recall if he would not rescind such pernacious ideas.
Lee smiled and grasped Congosto's "bull" by the horns. He answered that should an official document be inscribed containing the mentioned reasons for his recall, and should it be then signed by all officials of Havana and Madrid, he (Lee) would then take grat pleasure in affixing to the document his own signature and would forward it, thus completed to the Government of the United States.
	MAY BE ANOTHER GRIEVANCE.
	Immediately Congosto subsided an the incident became closed.
	Gen. Lee considers that another sore point with new autonomical "secretaries" may be Sigsbee's alleged oversight in not having called in turn upon each of the men, though he had already completely and exactly fulfilled the naval regulations and his instructions in calling officially upon Gen. Parrado and Spanish Admiral Monterola. 	Before and visits were made Gen. Lee wrote to Congosto and the General Secreatry asking at what time and upon whom should Sigsbee call in obeying his instructions to officially visit the supreme power in the island or its representatives.
	Congosto answered in writing naming Gen. Parrado, then Acting Governor-General in Blanco's absence, as the proper person.
	Sigsbee thereuponcalled upon Parrado in due and proper form, and upon Manteroba as well.
	But the Autonomical Cabinet, whose power lies chiefly in its title did not like it, and Congosto inveigled Gen. Lee and Capt. Sigsbee into into an informal call at Cabinet Headquarters in the palace after an official visit upon Blanco.
	The Autonomical secretaries were quickly gathered together and every effort was made to give an official tinge to a strictly accidental visit. Capt. Sigsbee, of course, said he would be glad to receive the gentlemen personally aboard the Maine.

Tried to Eutrap Sigsbee.
	They went en masse and proposed an absolutely unexpected toast of official significance. Sigsbee rose to the occasion and returned their personal sentiments without one word of reference to either government or autonomy .
	A typewritten report of his answer made at once thereafter shows this although the Havana press quoted him as drinking to the success of Cuban autonomy. The cabinet of secretaries did not like that either.
	And Lee as the man of most prominent position has been covertly attacked ever since the occurence of the three episodes mentioned.
	As regards the charges of communicating with the insurgents, Gen. Lee dubs them absolutely false.	
	He has not followed De Lome's methods, has not written letters on Cuban affairs, even in response to queries of important legislators, nor even mentioned political matters in letters to his family.
	Outside of sending an agent in an attempt to save Col. Ruiz's life as authorized by Blanco, Lee has sent no word to the field.
	As to receiving "presendados" and captured rebels in the consulate, Lee considers it his duty to send all possible information from both sides to Washington and receives all callers at the consulate during his regular office hours.
	Gen. Lee and Consul Barker, just resigned, have always been good friends, Spanish attempts to insinuate to the contrary notwithstanding. Barker was not dissatisfied with the tardy receipt of American food at Sagua, for he understands the situation. Lee hopes that if Barker persists in resigning, which course he has personally advised Barker against, some good, strong man may be sent to take the vacant position.
	Lee admires Barker's fearlessness in the discharge of difficultand delicate consular duties.
	Americans have not yet been advised by their Consul-General to leave Havana.
	He smilingly likens his position to that of the Senator from Rhode Island in 1861, when State after State was seceding, and who said in Congress.
	"I see your game, gentlemen; you're all going to secede from the Union and leave Rhode Island to pay the national debt."
	Gen. Lee laughs at the story in a New York daily of family fears causing the arrival of Fitzhugh Lee, jr. in Havana. The son has only come to visit his father during a short vacation and returns home this week.
	One thing may be very definitely understood: Gen. Lee does not intend to leave Cuba until after the present crisis. He is firm and cool. He knows both sides here, and, although hated by Spaniards, is just as much feared. 
	The most sceptical member of the Court of Inquiry objected this morning vigorously to the free manner in which the New York dailies report the Maine affair. He particularly criticized the Herald's mistaken quotation as to the Maine's keel being blown out of water.
	The board inspected the wreck again this morning. Constructor Hoover made a detailed examination of the most significant portions above water.
	The Fern is now moving to a new moorage, to make room for an expected American warship, probably the Montgomery. 
	Congress said to-day that the correspondents were to be expelled with the "authorization of Gen. Lee," whatever that may mean. It is reported that Clara Barton has discharged several agents for the distribution of reconcentrado food on account of dishonesty. They sold canned goods to grocery store keepers. Miss Barton is doing nobly, and is seeing that every pound of American charity goes to suffering ones. She is ably seconded by practical assistants now.
	The Government buoy is all ready for the Montgomery. The fern, which was there, has been moved out to make way for the Alfonso XII. Now the three Spanish warships are close together. The full typewritten text of Sigsbee's answer to the toast of the Autonomical Cabinet upon their visit to the Maine was as follows.
	"I have the honor on behalf of myself and the officers of the Maine, to reciprocate the very friendly sentiments which you have just expressed. It is my wish and effort in my position to do all within my power to continue the friendly relations so long existant between Spain and the United States. I beg to express my admiration for the high purpose of your honorable body, and assure you that the officers of the Maine welcome you on board in both your official and private character.
	"This speech the autonomistic cabinet thought was an American greeting to the new autonomy. It was so called in the local press. The Board of Inquiry had a secret meeting to-day. It is not known what it was about.
	Four witnesses were questioned; Carpenter Heim, an important witness, was held for over an hour. He is said to know that Maine's hull better than any one else aboard her. Naval Constructor Hoover was also closely questioned. 
	There is an impression in naval circles that the Maine question will probably be referred to an international board for investigation. Some members of the American board say they are sorry the first investigation was not so made. 
	Contradictory reports are certainly to be expected from the two commissions now at work.
SYLVESTER SCOVEL.