CAPT.-GEN. BLANCO CABLES THE WORLD ON HAVANA SITUATION LAST NIGHT.
Confirms the Accuracy of The World's Own News as to the Brief Riot--It Did Not Affect Americans.
To the Editor of the World:
    The actual situation in Havana is one of complete tranquility, without fear of any disorder. The sensational rumors which circulate here are the work of persons of mischievous intentions who are trying to create the impression that great danger exists here. Nothing more has occurred than a short and unimportant turbulence, which was promptly repressed. BLANCO.
    The World's Bird's-Eye-View of the Whole Situation.
    Spain has stopped making war against the Cubans. The remnant of the Spanish army has ceased fighting. It has almost ceased marching. 
    Twenty-five days ago I saw a column of Spanish troops, foot and horse, march out from the town of Arroyo Blanco. They met one hundred of Gomez's ragged infantry in extended order. The Spanish troops did not even change their marching formation. They halted, shot three volleys, then marched to the fear and to Arroyo Blanco.
    A sample battel had been fought and not a Cuban had been hurt. 
    There are two great reasons for the present Spanish torpidity. 
    Spanish Officers Don't Want to Fight.
    One is that the Spanish officers do not wish to fight nor even to vigorously pursue the rebels. They never did. From major-generals to captains they have never honestly obeyed either Campos or Weyler. One was too weak to force them to it; the other did not care, for his policy did not depend much on real military activity. And Spain's sworn officers have allowed the Cuban war to continue along--and too long--to their great profit in medals and money.
    Now they are ordered by Gen. Blanco. They hate him. Weyler represented final Spanish victory through Cuban extinction. Blanco represents speedy Spanish loss through Cuban concession. Never vigorous, Spain's officers now are military corpses as far as fighting Cubans is concerned. This first reason for Spain's military inactivity would paralyze effective operations even without without the second. This kills them.
    
Spain Has No Army Left.
    It is that Spain has no army left. The Cuban climate and Spanish official robbery has sickened and starved out the Cuban pacificos and the Cuban rebels, too, in six months more of power.
    He did succeed in starving three-quarters of a million of them by destroying the food of the fields of Cuba after clearing them of their cultivation.
    The World's News Admitted Now.
    The very Havana papers which bitterly assailed The World's first horrible dedath figures now grant larger totals. And Canalejas, the investigator for Premier Canovas, told me Dec. 28 that the private figures agree with The World's.
    But Weyler starved the Spanish army, []. His destruction of crops kept his soldiers from living off the country. And he allowed his officers to continue to steal and sell the army rations which thereupon became their only subsistance.
    Seven hundred of them were herded between decks of the small steamer Argonaut Dec. 28 to 30. Any one of them might have posed for one of the starving Cuban reconcentrados photographically reproduced in The World. The [] cotton drill uniform was the only difference. The leaden skin, the claw-like fingers, the pipe-stem shanks, the swollen stomach and feet of starvation were there.
    They were lodged like pigs and fed but little better. The kind-hearted ship captain appropriated the soft bread of the willing passengers to make the sick soldiers' soup more than hot water.
    
    Army Decimated by Hunger.
    Ex-Minister Cana[] had missed the Government [] and was on board. One word (startled from his heart and from his patriotism) made him acknowledge the thing that has done more than all other things combined to lose Cuba. That is Spanish official dishonesty. I said:
    "Tell me, Senor Canalejas, what is the matter with the 700 patriotic Spanish boys on this ship?
    Canalejas didn't stop to thing. His eyes intensified and he groaned "Hambre?"
    This word means "hunger" and this one thing has reduced Spain's magnificant army to police force. 
    Tolerated military thievery up to Blanco's time is clearly shown by that human general's order as to feeding the troops, and is clinched by the way the Spanish officers hate him.
    Gen. Blanco is trying hard to improve the condition of his troops. But most of them are like the starved reconcentra[] in being far too gone to save.
    With his army Gen. Blanco is even worse off than with the hunger question. He has no more money with which to work and he has not as many honest men to spend it for him. No honest Spanish line officer below a major general can become rich now, therefore all Spanish officers now hate Blanco. 
    The condition of the Spanish soldiers must become worse instead of better, as the officers see their harvest time steadily shortening.
    I have seen soldiers begging in eight towns of Cuba. The newspapers openly mention their nine months' pay arrears. 
    Owing to the uselessness of the volunteers, Gen. Blanco has to use so many of his regulars for guard duty as to [] but a handful for active work [] the insurgents.
    
    Where The Regulars Are.
    [] [] healthy soldiers are posted [] as follows:
    [] the fortified towns, hello[] stations and sugar estates, 20,000 [] in "troops" and railroad forts, [] [] [] for active [] over the island. And they hardly ever march. 
    Even the "official reports" of the daily engagements of the whole island have dwindled to a dozen slight skirmished a day. 
    What few fighting generals Spain had in Cuba are on their disgusted way to Madrid.
    Probably the best of them, Gen. Segurn, tersely explained the present military situation. I asked him:
    "How about Pando's great operations in the East, General?"
    "No hoy" (there are none), he answered."They are using more powder in salutes to autonomy than against the rebels.
    
    The Cubans Stronger than a Year Ago.
    The Cubans have not lost in numbers of armed men, while their efficiency has greatly increased. Gomez's figure of 30,000 men is correct. More than half of these are in Eastern Cuba.
    The Cuban's arms are much improved. Private soldiers no longer cut off the barrel of a fine Mauser rifle to make it easier to carry, and Gomez has hanged several insubordinate chiefs, so now every military order does not entail a long discussion.
    Garcia has twelve pieces of artillery in Eastern Cuba. Amond them a fine Driggs-Schroeder three-inch piece and a Sims Dudley dynamite gun, which has done excellent service.
    There are half a dozen modern small calibre cannon in central and western Cuba.
    All the cannon except one are in charge of Americans. A cuban infantry support is furnished to each.
    
    Americans in Cuban Ranks.
    There are perhaps fifty Americans in the insurgent ranks. They generally are well esteemed. ALl have been wounded at least once.
    The Cuban rifles are Mausers and Remingtons. The officers usually carry Winchester or Colt repeating weapons.
    All over Cuba the insurgents are now well supplied with cartridges. Gomez says he has enough "for the war."
    They lack clothes. Last wet season they lacked medicines. The death rate was very high, particularly among the children of the families who preferred a risky existence in the manigua to sure starvation in the towns.
    Reserves All Used Up.
    The surplus of unarmed men is about used up. At first there were several men for each weapon; now there is only one. From now on each of the 30,000 armed Cubans who may die or be shot will lessen the insurgent ability to resist. 
    Had not Blanco found the Spanish army decimated he would have won ultimately by sheer weight of numbers.
    Just now the healthy season is on, and there is small mortality from fever. If simple medicines are sent in quantity the next rainy season's mortality will be small, as the malarial fever is easily prevented and controlled. 
    The unclothed portion of the insurgent army suffers severly. Cuban nights are very chilly now. In comparison with the days they are icy. With the unclad insurgents it is a question between Cuban cold with Cuban autonomy and Cuban independence.
    If not clothed I think one-fourth of them, or 7,500 insurgents, are likely to surrender if Spain's offer of autonomy lasts long enough for them to understand it. This loss, however, would leave the insurgent army yet vastly stronger compared with Spain's force than it was a year ago.
    And even if niether clothes nor medicine are sent to them, the Cuban revolutionists are likely to continue to comparatively strengthen, although to absolutely lose.
    
    Plenty of Food.
    The Cubans have food and its plenty is increasing in most of the island. 
    Unfortunately for Blanco, his every humane reversal of Weyler's edicts aids the rebels. 
    The extension of the "zones of cultivation" about the fortified towns makes it easier for the rebels of Havana and Matanzas provinces. There they depend almost entirely upon these for food.
    In Pinar del Rio Province there is an abundant supply of recently planted vegetable food in the northern mountain range, and Pando's recent order allowing Spanish columns to return to camp in fortified towns each night gives the [] 
    as being the extreme limit of her resources.
    THey know certain English syndicates are ready to lend another $500,000,000 in return for concessions of yet untouched mineral resources in the north of Spain. But they claim Spain would lose more giving the extreme privileges demanded than in losing Cuba.
    The Cubans have a bitter hatred of the flag of Weyler that blinds them to the real advantages real autonomy offers. 
    
    Will Give Up All but the Flag
    There is no doubt that Spain will grant to the Cubans everything except the Spanish flag. Dupuy de Lome, I know, has said: "Spain will even go so far as to allow the Cubans to put a five-pointed star in the Spanish-Cuban autonomical banner. 
    The rebels reject autonomy, and may be expected to do so until the opposition to the same thing from the Spanish side has caused it to be lost in graver and in international complications. Autonomy is dead. 
    
    Cuba is Lost to Spain.
    The Spanish Ministry now has to face the loss of CUba. For if war has failed and the rebels will not be coaxed by concessions, they must win as least as against Spain. The Spanish problem is how to lose Cuba and not lose the Spanish throne.
    The Spanish peasantry is intensely patriotic and intensely ignorant. Cuba for hundreds of years has been to them the synonym for Spanish colonial greatness. Hardly a Spanish family but has lost a member "for Cuba." They cannot understand how Spain could lose Cuba to the Cubans. They would be angry at its being sold to "the enemy."
    Outright loss would certainly mean a popular uprising which the [] would be quick to successfully use, while sale would produce the same thing on a smaller scale.
    Sagasta, his government and his Wueen would be greatly endangered should Cuba go directly to the Cubans in any way. The same great ifnorant patriotism would suffer uncomplainingly the loss of Cuba to the United States. The peasants are patriotic enough, stirred constantly by Spanish jingo journalism, to go willingly to war. 
    Trafalgar in Spanish school books is termed "glorious."
    
    Sagasta's Only Course.
    Sagasta can save his government surely in this way only. 
    Spain has a good excuse for going to war to-day, or will have the moment autonomy publicly proves its dead state. 
    Whether there is recognized war in Cuba or not, it is true that the United States first enabled the Cuban rebels to make war by allowing arms and cartridges to leave her shores for Cuba. The United States then prevented Spain from finishing the war by demanding the recall of Weyler and his barbarous but successful policy. And when the American-forced autonomy proves useless either to attract rebels in Cuba or to stop expeditions from the States, Spain can claim damages which the United states will not pay.
    The Cuban war would end within two months but for American filibustering expeditions. Both Gen. Blanco for Spain and Gen. Gomez for Cuba have acknowledged through The World these plain facts.
    Might Send Weyler Back.
    Or Spain can easily provoke war by sending Weyler back. The Spanish army officers are helping an international conflict. They see the Cuban struggle is near its end and would welcome any kind of war.
    Gen. Segura told me in the presence of Canalejas:
    "The happiest day of my life will be when war is declared against the United States."
    THis was not braggadocio. Segura is brave. And I know that Canalejas will recommend to Sagasta to provoke war with the United States as quickly as possible. He said:
    "The only mistake Spain has made was in not declaring war two years ago, when she was better prepared for it."
    Although war provocation may come from Spain in bellicose claims for filibustering damages, or by a return to barbariem in Cuba, the Spanish-American war is far more likely to come from the Spaniards in Cuba.
    Danger Chiefly from Havana.
    The volunteers of Havana are not soldiers, but they are organized and armed. Their officers , also their employers, openly prefer annexation to even real home rule. They are the moneyed men and the business men of Cuba.
    They were Weylerites. Now they are annexationists, because they are hated by the very Cubans, whom they wish out of the way.
    They are backed by the manufacturers of the north of Spain. One of the most prominent of these spoke for all when he said:
    "What will become of the 100,000 families who live from the factories of Catalonia if the Cubans make their own customs laws?"
    The Spanish merchants of Havana can cause United States intervention by a mere whisper to their men, which would mean the death of a few Americans. They they have the nerve is proved by their packing Gen. Dulce off to Spain years ago. They hate Blanco  more and fear him less. He really has not as many regular soldiers at his immediate orders as had unhappy Dulce.
    Warship Would Save Lives.
    The moment the merchants of Havana see either autonomy or Free Cuba near at hand they will give the signal to save their pocketbooks unless the United States prevents American deaths by threatening those same pocketbooks.
    This can be done by anchoring one first-class cruiser inside Havana harbor.
    War provocation from Havana can be eliminated and American life secured by the frank exhibition to the volunteer officers of 12-inch rifle muzzles whose every shell would burn one of their own stores.
    SYLVESTER SCOVEL