THE WORLD AGAIN MAKES HISTORY FOR SPAIN AND CUBA.The World Correspondent’s Mission to the Headquarters of Gen. Gomez, with theConsent of Spain’s Captain-General, and the Result.INSURGENT ARMY UNCLOTHED AND UNFED.GOMEZ’S MESSAGE TO WASHINGTON.HAVANA, Cuba, by way of Key West, Fla. Jan, 1. Gen. Maximo Gomez gave for The World on Dec. 23 his third and possibly his last statement of the conditions, hopes, plans and probabilities of the Cuban cause.He was at his headquarters at Majagua a beautiful stock farm near Arroyo Arena.Seated in his hammock, as is his custom, he talked Spanish to The World correspondent, who wrote notes in English. Chief of Staff Bossa, sitting next to the correspondent, retranslated the notes to Gen. Gomez, and he signed them. The first question naturally was regarding autonomy. “It Is too late," declared the Cuban Commander-In-Chief. “Frankly, I realize that although there are strings to some of the important provisions of the decrees, autonomy is a tremendous stride in advance for Spain, and close to genuine rule of, for and by the people."Three years ago it would have avoided war. It might have been accepted two years back, when we reached the gates of Havana. Now, no. Not even if Spain should give up to us everything but her flag." “But Senor Dupuy De Lome has said that Spain would even permit a five-pointed star in the Spanish flag for new Cuba," I remarked.Gen. Gomez thought a moment, then went on:NO HALF-WAY MEASURE.“If Spain will go that far thon we can wait for her willingness to change colors as well. We are still disposed to play many millions for the privilege of stopping bloodshed. But there must be no half-way measures. We tried them at the end of the last war. “I don't regard the concession of autonomy solely as a proof of Spanish weakness. Spain still counts resources to carry on the war a long time. Autonomy always was more or less the idea of the Liberal party. The death of Canovas and the failures of Weyler simply gave the Liberals more power.  "They made the error of thinking that the Cubans were wavering. Now they should be undeceived.  "It Is a long time since autonomy was promised. All the Cuban soldiers fully understand it. The Havana newspapers come here freely.COLD FOR EVERY LEADER."Attempts have been made to bribe almost every Cuban leader. Result- not one important surrender; no increase in presentados, even according to the Spanish official figures. And I think all who thought of surrendering have surrendered."Spain cannot do more than proclaim. She cannot have elections. There will be no one to vote. It will be a farce. With the armed volunteers voting as Conservatives in a body rabid Spaniards would be elected. What kind of autonomy would they administer?"Really, there is no Autonomist party. Blanco had to ransack the United States and Europe to find enough men of any name to occupy governmental posts. They had not courage enough to come out here and fight, nor to remain in the Island even to talk. They are no stuff for rulers in troublous times. “A handful of real Autonomists are the most pitiable men alive. They are like little boys who have long and longingly yearned for an unreachable apple; bad boys with bean shooter knock the apple down: but behold, the apple is a Red Sea apple and turns to dust In the good boys' mouths."“Gen. Gomes." The World correspondent interrupted, “you ore severely criticized in the United States for hanging people who come to your forces to talk autonomy."ONLY BRIBERS HANGED.The fiery old General's eyes blazed. "That is wrong, unjust," he responded. "First, such men are hanged not by personal flat, but under a recent law passed by our Government. Second, no one has been hanged who came merely to tall autonomy—only those who came to buy it we wish to avoid, but bribery. Were this not so, your own neck would be greatly in danger.”Gen. Gomez sizzled."And if you bad mentioned money or custom-house positions or advanced any autonomical argument of that species you would have decorated a guasima tree ten minutes later. It would be our worst possible policy to attempt to choke off discussion. In fact every proclamation of the' Autonomist party is handed to our men and the newspapers come here full of it."Our law for hanging Spanish emisaries necessarily included all of them, for almost all come with money.WASHINGTON HANGED ANDRE.“Your great Gen. Washington hanged Major Andre for just this reason. The only difference is that Andre had succeeded in corrupting Arnold, while not one Spanish briber has yet succeeded in buying a Cuban chief. The two Cuervo brothers who now are Spanish customs officers, were not leaders, but loafers.“I have great respect for Blanco. Not so many unarmed people are killed how as were before. I congratulate him upon his proclamations and sympathize with him that they are so slackly obeyed. He really has not enough men to carry on the war.Gen. Gomez smiled as he continued: "In fact, his army corps is made up of just the same skeleton organizations ours always has been. Your newspapers have made fun of our five army corps of a few thousand men each and our brigades of three hundred. To-day they are just as big as the Spaniards- and if Blanco really puts guards on the sugar estates he will have but a handful of men to use in the field."I have again prohibited grinding. Where there is work there is peace, and we do not wish peace without independence. However, I am sure that next Zafra will see both.PEACE BY NEXT YEAR. "This war cannot last more than a year. This is the first time I have ever put a limit to it. “I agree with Gen. Blanco in his message to The World that the war is really between Spain and the United States at least in this respect: When Spain finds that her last step—perfected and further broadened autonomy—falls both in Cuba and the United States, when the rebels don’t come from the manigua but expeditions do come from Florida, she must for very verguenza (shame) demand that the United States Government stop the rifles and cartridges that enable us to so easily conduct our system of war.  “I do not think the United States Government is stronger than the majority of its people. They are free, they sympathize with independence. I do not think any Spanish reforms will cause them to withdraw sympathy and aid. I expect as many expedition in the future as heretofore.QUIT OR FIGHT AMERICA."In a few weeks Spain will either evacuate Cuba or fight the United States. She probably will do the first and talk of the other."	I "But, General." The World correspondent asked, "would that not mean annexation?”"No," Gen. Gomez answered; ”I think the United States only want Cuba commercially. They will have that with Cuban Independence and not have the complex problem of managing an island of different language, ideas, institutions  and social customs. Frankly, if Cuba were annexed to-morrow, I don’t think there is an American statesman who would know what to do with her."The naval position of the United States also is as much strengthened by Cuba’s Independence as it would be by annexation. The last threatening point held by a European power would be vacated.SACASTA'S ONLY SALVATION.’’If Spain continues to reject our proposition to buy the Island, she has no other course but to lose it ostensibly to the superior power of the United States in a blaze of patriotic glory. That will use up the discontent of the Spanish people against their present form of government in war talk against the United States. It is the only way Sagasta can save himself."Canovas had that idea firmly fixed. He would have done so rather than recall Weyler.”"By recalling Weyler he really would have abandoned the only way to conquer Cuba—extermination of the Cubans. In short, Spain has been forced by the United States to give up the only way of winning the war—Weylerism. “Now the only question is as to how she will lose the island—by common sense and sell to the Cubans, or by war, or rather by preparations for war, with the United States.“I know Spain never had common sense.I believe her statesmen, who never have been squeamish about robbing their country pecuniarily, will make the war so that, safe still in their positions, they can continue to do so.  I do not refer to Sagasta, but to his persuaders. The Spanish Prime Minister is honest and poor.“Were it not for humanity, I should say Weyler’s infamous bando, or rather his failure to feed the country people once he had them in fortified towns, was a glorious thing, It has certainly helped  the revolution. Indeed, it has guaranteed its success, dor now autonomy fails flat on the ears of the revolutionists, each of whom, no matter how low in rank nor how ignorant nor how tired of war, has had a wife or mother or a father or helpless children, or at least some close relative, cruelly starved to death under the ‘protection’ of the Spanish flag.“Weyler’s barbarism has created a bitter hatred that no reform, no political concessions can  heal.“Materially, the starvation of the farmers in the towns left plenty to eat for the armed men in the field. And Weyler destroyed his only means of locating our forces, while he did not injure our spy system. There were always some farmers, willing to sell information to Spain. They were taken to town with the others, while the large proportion remaining in the manigua to protect their own lives from Weylerism had to treble their former vigilance over the troops’ movements. We get their information. The taking of wives, sweethearts and children out of the fields also greatly improved our forces. The Cubans are very domestic. They fight better alone.“Blanco’s efforts are the most commendable but pitiably inefficient; He has neither money enough nor subordinates to spend it honestly. He cannot possibly save even the three-quarters he tells The World he expects to save, for half of the remaining reconcentrados are too far gone. They need careful nursing. The only food Blanco has to give them would kill them.”Sylvester Scovel.THE JOURNEY TO GOMEZ’S CAMP.HAVANA. Jan. 1.—The World's correspondent has accomplished his mission. He has learned from Maximo Gomez's own lips the Cuban military, chief's opinion of the scheme of autonomy offered by Spain to Cuba.Gomez refuses the proffered autonomy. He vows he will win Cuba’s independence by the sword. More, in a message to The World, Gomez tells the people of the United States why he rejects the plan for Cuban self-government, so-called.Besides, The World’s correspondent has informed himself of the sentiment among the body of the insurgents as to the proposed scheme of autonomy, of the true state of affairs in the field, of the resisting power of the insurgents, what clothes they have to wear, what they have to eat.To obtain these facts, to fulfill his mission, The World’s correspondent was armed with two passes, one from the general-in-chief of the Spanish forces, Consul-General Blanco; one from the general-in-chief of the Cuban forces, Maximo Gomez. Each pass was given with the knowledge of the donor of the other, each pass was given with but one promise by The World correspondent—the sacred promise to tell the truth.For Blanco wishes to know the truth about the enemy. That Is to say he has common sense. Blanco has reversed the policy of Weyler who carefully concealed every truth he could hide as to Spaniards and Cubans both. Weyler believed in secrecy; Blanco believes, with Moret, Minister of the Colonies, in the Spanish Cabinet, who said to me in Spain: "The truth is not always agreeable, but it is always very necessary.” And Moret has on file all The World’s despatches from the field in Cuba. Blanco believes in publicity; that the time has arrived when the struggle will be soonest finished by telling the truth. The official reports of the Spanish chiefs of columns are not always unbiased; the whispered rumors that come to him from the ranks of the insurgents are even more untrustworthy.So The World correspondent went to learn the exact truth—whether Gomez would accept the autonomy Spain offers. A year ago The World correspondent was the unofficial bearer of a message to Gomez from Olney, then Secretary of State of the United States. A year ago President Cleveland and Mr. Olney hoped to end the war by Gomez's acceptance of a plan of autonomy which they had evolved. Gomez rejected it and, over his signature, told through The World why he rejected it. Now he rejects the present scheme.The war must go on.Besides the passes we were protected by that which should protect an American citizen anywhere on earth—the Stars and Stripes. Through his brother-in-law, Marcos Garcia, Governor of Santa Clara Province, Madrigal got permission from Gen. Aguirre, the Spaniard commanding the province, to display the American flag on the fields of Cuba. We felt sure that, the flag would protect us—after it was recognized. But the trouble was that it was not a very big flag, only 24 by 18 inches. On the other hand, Mauser rifles carry more than a mile and the Spaniards always shoot at long range at any small mounted party. Indeed, by this reckless habit they have often rilled each other.The Spaniards can give up all hope of starving out the insurgents in Santa Clara province. More than half a million cattle grazed In the fields. Weyler's ’’reconcentration" took away half the men who tended the cattle, but plenty are left. Besides, the pacificos who remain In the manigua are busily cultivating vegetables.There is plenty to eat in Eastern Santa Clara. 	Sylvester Scovel