CUBANS THINK WE SIDE WITH SPAIN.

They Were Told So, and the Doings of Our Warships in Island Port Settled It.

(Copyright. 1898, by the Press Publishing Company, New York World.)
(By Cable from a World Staff Correspondent) 
    MATANZAS,  Cuba, Feb. 5. - The United States cruiser Montgomery’s arrival here excited much interest.  
    Insurgent sympathizers are downcast. They had been told that American ships come to Cuba to aid Spain in establishing autonomy, and now they believe it.
    Upon entering the harbor here Capt. Converse, the commander of the 
Montgomery, hoisted the Spanish flag and fired a salute of twenty-one guns, precisely as
he would do on entering Barcelona or any other Spanish port.
    The Maine on entering Havana harbor did not salute until her commander knew that the courtesy would be returned.
	Capt. Converse's action shows that that [sic] there has been a change in the United States Government’s instructions. The results prove the fallacy of the reasoning that there would be trouble if an American warship should visit Cuba, against which proposition The World alone has fought.
    Official visits were made promptly and returned. Capt. Converse visited several officials on shore, including the Governor of Matanzas Province, and the Mayor of the town also.
    An unfortunate' omission of Gen. Lee and Commander Sigsbee, of the Maine, may be misinterpreted; they did not call upon the President of the Autonomical Council Cabinet. The officers of the French ship expected to arrive in Havana to-morrow will do this, and a reception probably will be tendered to them. One would have been given to the American officers had they officially recognized the new autonomical Cuban Government.
	Six hundred persons visited the Montgomery to-day. A part of the Spanish military band stationed here volunteered to give  a concert aboard ship.
    The Montgomery goes from here to Santiago, where she is due Tuesday morning. Then she will go to Jamaica for coal and orders.
    She made a great one-engine record coming down. Her sailing orders came unexpectedly and one engine was under slight repairs, which are now completed. With the other engine the ship made nine knots and a half, then was slowed down to an average speed of eight knots and a half.	
SYLVESTER SCOVEL